Swift has observed over three hundred supernovae in its first ten years. Photometry from the Ultra-Violet Optical Telescope (UVOT) is being compiled in the Swift Optical/Ultraviolet Supernovae Archive (SOUSA). The diversity of supernovae leads to a wide dynamic range of intrinsic properties. The intrinsic UV brightness of supernovae as a function of type and epoch allows one to understand the distance ranges at which Swift can reliably detect supernovae. The large Swift sample also includes supernovae from the same galaxy as other Swift supernovae. Through the first ten years, these families include 34 supernovae from 16 host galaxies (two galaxies have each hosted three Swift supernovae).
We present details of our investigation of the progenitors to core-collapse supernovae. We discuss observations and the theory of the lowest-mass stars to explode as supernovae.
Many aspects of the progenitor systems, environments, and explosion dynamics of the various subtypes of supernovae are difficult to investigate at extragalactic distances where they are observed as unresolved sources. Alternatively, young supernova remnants in our own galaxy and in the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds offer opportunities to resolve, measure, and track expanding stellar ejecta in fine detail, but the handful that are known exhibit widely different properties that reflect the diversity of their parent explosions and local circumstellar and interstellar environments. A way of complementing both supernova and supernova remnant research is to establish strong empirical links between the two separate stages of stellar explosions. Here we briefly review recent progress in the development of supernova---supernova remnant connections, paying special attention to connections made through the study of "middle-aged" (10-100 yr) supernovae and young (< 1000 yr) supernova remnants. We highlight how this approach can uniquely inform several key areas of supernova research, including the origins of explosive mixing, high-velocity jets, and the formation of dust in the ejecta.
We report the discovery of a candidate supernova in the ultraluminous galaxy IRAS 12112+0305 during April/May 1995. This would be the first supernova discovered in an ultraluminous galaxy with L_IR > 10^12 L_sun, although supernovae have been discovered in the slightly less extreme starburst galaxy NGC 3690. If this is a supernova, our very limited observations suggest that it is a Type II.
Supernovae play a critical role in observational cosmology as well as in astrophysics of stars and galaxies. Recent era has seen dramatic progress in the research of supernovae. Several programs to search systematically supernovae in nearby to distant galaxies have been very successful. Recent progresses in the modern supernova search are reviewed.
In this paper, we discuss the current status of core collapse supernova models and the future developments needed to achieve significant advances in understanding the supernova mechanism and supernova phenomenology, i.e., in developing a supernova standard model.
The current classification scheme for supernovae is presented. The main observational features of the supernova types are described and the physical implications briefly addressed. Differences between the homogeneous thermonuclear type Ia and similarities among the heterogeneous core collapse type Ib, Ic and II are highlighted. Transforming type IIb, narrow line type IIn, supernovae associated with GRBs and few peculiar objects are also discussed.
The discovery of the extremely luminous supernova SN 2006gy, possibly interpreted as a pair instability supernova, renewed the interest in very massive stars. We explore the evolution of these objects, which end their life as pair instability supernovae or as core collapse supernovae with relatively massive iron cores, up to about $3 M_\odot$.
The unprecedented spatial and spectral resolutions of Chandra have revolutionized our view of the X-ray emission from supernova remnants. The excellent data sets accumulated on young, ejecta dominated objects like Cas A or Tycho present a unique opportunity to study at the same time the chemical and physical structure of the explosion debris and the characteristics of the circumstellar medium sculpted by the progenitor before the explosion. Supernova remnants can thus put strong constraints on fundamental aspects of both supernova explosion physics and stellar evolution scenarios for supernova progenitors. This view of the supernova phenomenon is completely independent of, and complementary to, the study of distant extragalactic supernovae at optical wavelengths. The calibration of these two techniques has recently become possible thanks to the detection and spectroscopic follow-up of supernova light echoes. In this paper, I will review the most relevant results on supernova remnants obtained during the first decade of Chandra, and the impact that these results have had on open issues in supernova research.
October 2004 marks the 400th anniversary of the sighting of SN 1604, now marked by the presence of an expanding nebulosity known as Kepler's supernova remnant. Of the small number of remnants of historical supernovae, Kepler's remnant remains the most enigmatic. The supernova type, and hence the type of star that exploded, is still a matter of debate, and even the distance to the remnant is uncertain by more than a factor of two. As new and improved multiwavength observations become available, and as the time baseline of observations gets longer, Kepler's supernova remnant is slowly revealing its secrets. I review recent and current observations of Kepler's supernova remnant and what they indicate about this intriguing object.
Upcoming large-scale ground- and space- based supernova surveys will face a challenge identifying supernova candidates largely without the use of spectroscopy. Over the past several years, a number of supernova identification schemes have been proposed that rely on photometric information only. Some of these schemes use color-color or color-magnitude diagrams; others simply fit supernova data to models. Both of these approaches suffer a number of drawbacks partially addressed in the so-called Bayesian-based supernova classification techniques. However, Bayesian techniques are also problematic in that they typically require that the supernova candidate be one of a known set of supernova types. This presents a number of problems, the most obvious of which is that there are bound to be objects that do not conform to any presently known model in large supernova candidate samples. We propose a new photometric classification scheme that uses a Bayes factor based on color in order to identify supernovae by type. This method does not require knowledge of the complete set of possible astronomical objects that could mimic a supernova signal. Further, as a Bayesian approach, it accounts for all systematic and statistical uncertainties of the measurements in a single step. To illustrate the use of the technique, we apply it to a simulated dataset for a possible future large-scale space-based Joint Dark Energy Mission and demonstrate how it could be used to identify Type Ia supernovae. The method's utility in pre-selecting and ranking supernova candidates for possible spectroscopic follow-up -- i.e., its usage as a supernova trigger -- will be briefly discussed.
Usual supernova remnants have either ionizing plasma or plasma in collisional ionization equilibrium, i.e., the ionization temperature is lower than or equal to the electron temperature. However, the existence of recombining supernova remnants, i.e., supernova remnants with the ionization temperature higher than the electron temperature, is recently confirmed. One suggested way to have recombining plasma in a supernova remnant is to have a dense circumstellar medium at the time of the supernova explosion. If the circumstellar medium is dense enough, collisional ionization equilibrium can be established in the early stage of the evolution of the supernova remnant and subsequent adiabatic cooling which occurs after the shock wave gets out of the dense circumstellar medium makes the electron temperature lower than the ionization temperature. We study the circumstellar medium around several supernova progenitors and show which supernova progenitors can have a circumstellar medium which is dense enough to establish collisional ionization equilibrium soon after the explosion. We find that the circumstellar medium around red supergiants (especially massive ones) and the circumstellar medium which is dense enough to make Type IIn supernovae can establish collisional ionization equilibrium soon after the explosion and can evolve to recombining supernova remnants. Wolf-Rayet stars and white dwarfs have possibility to be recombining supernova remnants but the fraction is expected to be very small. As the occurrence rate of the explosions of red supergiants is much higher than that of Type IIn supernovae, the major progenitors of recombining supernova remnants are likely to be red supergiants.
Using observed star formation rates at redshifts up to z ~ 5, we calculate cosmic supernova rates for core collapse and Type Ia supernovae. Together with supernova statistics and detailed light curves, we estimate the number of supernovae, and their distribution in redshift, that should be detectable in different filters with various instruments, including both existing and future telescopes, in particular the NGST. We find that the NGST should detect several tens of core collapse supernovae in a single frame. Most of these will be core collapse supernovae with 1<lt> z <lt> 2, but about one third will have z > 2. Rates at z > 5 are highly uncertain. For ground based 8-10 m class telescopes we predict ~ 0.1 supernova per square arcmin to I_AB = 27, with about twice as many core collapse SNe as Type Ia's. The typical redshift will be z ~ 1, with an extended tail up to z ~ 2. Detectability of high redshift supernovae from ground is highly sensitive to the rest frame UV flux of the supernova, where line blanketing may decrease the rates severely in filters below 1 micron.
The recently-discovered, nearby young supernova remnant in the southeast corner of the older Vela supernova remnant may have been seen in measurements of nitrate abundances in Antarctic ice cores. Such an interpretation of this twenty-year-old ice-core data would provide a more accurate dating of this supernova than is possible purely using astrophysical techniques. It permits an inference of the supernova4s ${}^{44}$Ti yield purely on an observational basis, without reference to supernova modelling. The resulting estimates of the supernova distance and light-arrival time are 200 pc and 700 years ago, implying an expansion speed of 5,000 km/s for the supernova remnant. Such an expansion speed has been argued elsewhere to imply the explosion to have been a 15 $M_\odot$ Type II supernova. This interpretation also adds new evidence to the debate as to whether nearby supernovae can measurably affect nitrate abundances in polar ice cores.
Detailed radio observations of extragalactic supernovae are critical to obtaining valuable information about the nature and evolutionary phase of the progenitor star in the period of a few hundred to several tens-of-thousands of years before explosion. Additionally, radio observations of old supernovae (>20 years) provide important clues to the evolution of supernovae into supernova remnants, a gap of almost 300 years (SN ~1680=Cas A, to SN 1923A) in our current knowledge. Finally, new empirical relations indicate that it may be possible to use some types of radio supernovae as distance yardsticks, to give an independent measure of the distance scale of the Universe. However, the study of radio supernovae is limited by the sensitivity and resolution of current radio telescope arrays. Therefore, it is necessary to have more sensitive arrays, such as the Square Kilometer Array and the several other radio telescope upgrade proposals, to advance radio supernova studies and our understanding of supernovae, their progenitors, and the connection to supernova remnants.
Supernovae descendent from massive stars explode in media that have been modified by their progenitors' mass loss and UV radiation. The supernova ejecta will first interact with the circumstellar material shed by the progenitors at late evolutionary stages, and then interact with the interstellar material. Circumstellar nebulae in supernova remnants can be diagnosed by their small expansion velocities and high [N II]/H$\alpha$ ratios. The presence of circumstellar nebulae appears ubiquitous among known young supernova remnants. These nebulae can be compared to those around evolved massive stars to assess the nature of their supernova progenitors. Three types of archeological artifacts of supernova progenitors have been observed in supernovae and/or young supernova remnants: (1) deathbed ejecta, (2) circumstellar nebulae, and (3) interstellar bubbles. Examples of these three types are given.
We propose a bipolar jet model for supernova polarization. Light from the main component of the supernova (which we call the bulk supernova for short) scatters off electrons in the jets and is polarized: this polarized light is added to the direct emission from the bulk supernova and causes the overall supernova emission to be polarized. The motivation for the bipolar jet model is to resolve the potential paradox set by an analysis which suggests strong spherical symmetry for Type Ib supernovae and the expectation that Type Ib supernovae should be highly polarized in the continuum up to perhaps about 4 %. For the model we have derived simple, non-relativistic, approximate analytic formulae for relative amount of scattered flux and polarization. The polarization formula qualitatively reproduces two main features observed for at least some supernovae: (1) the rise to a polarization maximum and then decline with time; (2) the inverted P Cygni polarization profiles of lines. The model is strictly axisymmetric and predicts a constant position angle of intrinsic polarization. Since position angle variation of intrinsic polarization is observed, the model cannot account for all the polarization of all supernovae.
Supernova experiments to characterize dark energy require a well designed low redshift program; we consider this for both ongoing/near term (e.g. Supernova Legacy Survey) and comprehensive future (e.g. SNAP) experiments. The derived criteria are: a supernova sample centered near z=0.05 comprising 150-500 (in the former case) and 300-900 (in the latter case) well measured supernovae. Low redshift Type Ia supernovae play two important roles for cosmological use of the supernova distance-redshift relation: as an anchor for the Hubble diagram and as an indicator of possible systematics. An innate degeneracy in cosmological distances implies that 300 nearby supernovae nearly saturate their cosmological leverage for the first use, and their optimum central redshift is z=0.05. This conclusion is strengthened upon including velocity flow and magnitude offset systematics. Limiting cosmological parameter bias due to supernova population drift (evolution) systematics plausibly increases the requirement for the second use to less than about 900 supernovae.
This paper presents a novel method for determining the probability that a supernova candidate belongs to a known supernova type (such as Ia, Ibc, IIL, \emph{etc.}), using its photometric information alone. It is validated with Monte Carlo, and both space- and ground- based data. We examine the application of the method to well-sampled as well as poorly sampled supernova light curves and investigate to what extent the best currently available supernova models can be used for typing supernova candidates. Central to the method is the assumption that a supernova candidate belongs to a group of objects that can be modeled; we therefore discuss possible ways of removing anomalous or less well understood events from the sample. This method is particularly advantageous for analyses where the purity of the supernova sample is of the essence, or for those where it is important to know the number of the supernova candidates of a certain type (\emph{e.g.}, in supernova rate studies).
The Swift Gamma Ray Burst Explorer has proven to be an incredible platform for studying the multiwavelength properties of supernova explosions. In its first ten years, Swift has observed over three hundred supernovae. The ultraviolet observations reveal a complex diversity of behavior across supernova types and classes. Even amongst the standard candle type Ia supernovae, ultraviolet observations reveal distinct groups. When the UVOT data is combined with higher redshift optical data, the relative populations of these groups appear to change with redshift. Among core-collapse supernovae, Swift discovered the shock breakout of two supernovae and the Swift data show a diversity in the cooling phase of the shock breakout of supernovae discovered from the ground and promptly followed up with Swift. Swift observations have resulted in an incredible dataset of UV and X-ray data for comparison with high-redshift supernova observations and theoretical models. Swift's supernova program has the potential to dramatically improve our understanding of stellar life and death as well as the history of our universe.
Cosmic rays could be produced via shock acceleration powered by supernovae. The supernova hypothesis implies that each supernova injects on average some 1e50 erg in cosmic rays, while the shock acceleration model predicts a powerlaw cosmic ray spectrum with the slope close to 2. Verification of these predictions requires measurements of spectrum and power of cosmic ray injection from supernova population(s). Here we obtain such measurements based on gamma-ray observation of Constellation III region of Large Magellanic Cloud. We show that gamma-ray emission from this young star formation region originates from cosmic rays injected by approximately two thousand supernovae, rather than by massive star wind powered superbubble pre-dating supernova activity. Cosmic ray injection power is found to be (1.1-0.2+0.5)x 1e50 erg/supernova (for the estimated interstellar medium density 0.3/cm3). The spectrum is a powerlaw with slope 2.09-0.07+0.06. This agrees with the model of particle acceleration at supernova shocks and provides a direct proof of the supernova origin of cosmic rays.
We examine the efficiency with which supernova-enriched gas may be ejected from dwarf disk galaxies, using a methodology previously employed to study the self-enrichment efficiency of dwarf spheroidal systems. Unlike previous studies that focused on highly concentrated starbursts, in the current work we consider discrete supernova events spread throughout various fractions of the disk. We model disk systems having gas masses of 10^8 and 10^9 solar masses with supernova rates of 30, 300, and 3000 per Myr. The supernova events are confined to the midplane of the disk, but distributed over radii of 0, 30, and 80% of the disk radius, consistent with expectations for Type II supernovae. In agreement with earlier studies, we find that the enriched material from supernovae is largely lost when the supernovae are concentrated near the nucleus, as expected for a starburst event. In contrast, however, we find the loss of enriched material to be much less efficient when the supernovae occur over even a relatively small fraction of the disk. The difference is due to the ability of the system to relax following supernova events that occur over more extended regions. Larger physical separations also reduce the likelihood of supernovae going off within low-density "chimneys" swept out by previous supernovae. We also find that, for the most distributed systems, significant metal loss is more likely to be accompanied by significant mass loss. A comparison with theoretical predications indicates that, when undergoing self-regulated star formation, galaxies in the mass range considered shall efficiently retain the products of Type II supernovae.
Supernova surveys can be used to study a variety of subjects such as: (i) cosmology through type Ia supernovae (SNe), (ii) star-formation rates through core-collapse SNe, and (iii) supernova properties and their connection to host galaxy characteristics. The Stockholm VIMOS Supernova Survey (SVISS) is a multi-band imaging survey aiming to detect supernovae at redshift ~0.5 and derive thermonuclear and core-collapse supernova rates at high redshift. In this paper we present the supernovae discovered in the survey along with light curves and a photometric classification into thermonuclear and core-collapse types. To detect the supernovae in the VLT/VIMOS multi-epoch images, we used difference imaging and a combination of automatic and manual source detection to minimise the number of spurious detections. Photometry for the found variable sources was obtained and careful simulations were made to estimate correct errors. The light curves were typed using a Bayesian probability method and Monte Carlo simulations were used to study misclassification. We detected 16 supernovae, nine of which had a core-collapse origin and seven had a thermonuclear origin. The estimated misclassification errors are quite small, in the order of 5%, but vary with both redshift and type. The mean redshift of the supernovae is 0.58. Additionally, we found a variable source with a very extended light curve that could possibly be a pair instability supernova.
Supernovae play an integral role in the feedback of processed material into the ISM of galaxies and are responsible for much of the chemical enrichment of the universe. The rate of supernovae can also reveal the star formation histories. Supernova rates are usually measured through the non-thermal radio continuum luminosity; however, a correlation between near-infrared [FeII] emission and supernova remnants has also been noted. We aim to find a quantitative relationship between the [FeII] at 1.26 um ([FeII]$_{1.26}$) luminosity and supernova rate in a sample of 11 near-by starburst galaxy centers. We perform a pixel-pixel analysis of this correlation on SINFONI data cubes. Using Br$\gamma$ equivalent width and luminosity as the only observational inputs into the Starburst 99 model, we derive the supernova rate at each pixel and thus create maps of supernova rates. We then compare these morphologically and quantitatively to the [FeII]$_{1.26}$ luminosity. We have found that a strong linear and morphological correlation exists between supernova rate and [FeII]$_{1.26}$ on a pixel-pixel basis:   \[ log\frac{\nu_{SNrate}}{yr^{-1}pc^{-2}} = 1.01 \pm 0.2\ast log\frac{[FeII]_{1.26}}{erg s^{-1}pc^{-2}} - 41.17 \pm 0.9\]   This relation is valid for normal star forming galaxies but breaks down for extreme ultra luminous galaxies. The supernova rates derived from the Starburst 99 model are in good agreement with the radio-derived supernova rates, which underlines the strength of using [FeII] emission as a tracer of supernova rate. With the strong correlation found in this sample of galaxies, we conclude that [FeII]$_{1.26}$ emission can be generally used to derive accurate supernova rates on either a pixel-pixel or integrated galactic basis.
Here I review some nuclear physics aspects of core-collapse supernovae concerning neutrinos. Studies of neutrino emission and interactions in supernovae are crucial to our understanding of the explosion mechanism, the heavy element nucleosynthesis, and pulsar proper motions. I discuss the effects of reduced neutrino opacities in dense nuclear matter on supernova neutrino emission and their implications for the delayed supernova explosion mechanism and the synthesis of neutron-rich heavy elements. I also discuss the effects of parity violation in weak interactions on supernova neutrino emission and their implications for pulsar proper motions.
Circumstellar interaction has been observed around all types of massive star supernovae, especially at radio and X-ray wavelengths. The interaction shells in Type Ib/c supernovae appear to be moving rapidly, although SN 1998bw remains the only case for which the evidence points to relativistic expansion. Type IIP supernovae have relatively low mass loss rates, consistent with moderate mass single stars at the ends of their lives. Type IIb and some IIL and IIn supernovae can have strong mass loss leading up to the explosion, which occurs in a star with little H on it. The mass loss may be driven by the luminosity of the late burning stages.
The successful theoretical supernova explosion models should be able to explain any features of the emission from supernovae at any evolutionary stage. We check several models from two different points of view. With the multi-frequency radiation hydro code STELLA we calculate gamma-ray, bolometric and broad-band UBVI light curves. Then we use the same models to calculate the emission from young supernova remnants.   Here we present new plots for gamma-ray luminosity from several SN Ia models and recomputations of bolometric and UBVRI light curves of model 13C for SN 1993J.
An attempt is made to assess the significance of rotation in the core-collapse supernova phenomenon, from both observational and theoretical point of view. The data on supernovae particularly indicative of the role of rotation in the collapse-triggered explosion is emphasized. The problem of including the rotation of presupernova core into the supernova theory is considered. A two-dimensional classification scheme of core-collapse supernovae is proposed which unifies 'classical' supernovae of type Ib/c and type II, 'hypernovae' and some GRB events.
The Supernova Acceleration Probe (SNAP) will use Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) as distance indicators to measure the effect of dark energy on the expansion history of the Universe. (SNAP's weak-lensing program is described in a companion White Paper.) The experiment exploits supernova distance measurements up to their fundamental systematic limit; strict requirements on the monitoring of each supernova's properties lead to the need for a space-based mission. Results from pre-SNAP experiments, which characterize fundamental SN Ia properties, will be used to optimize the SNAP observing strategy to yield data, which minimize both systematic and statistical uncertainties. SNAP has achieved technological readiness and the collaboration is poised to begin construction.
Type Ia supernovae (SN Ia) have provided the first evidence for an accelerating universe and for the existence of an unknown ``dark energy'' driving this expansion. The 5-year Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS) will deliver \~700 type Ia supernovae and as many type II supernovae with well-sampled light curves in 4 filters g', r', i' and z'. The current status of the project will be presented, along with the real time processing leading to the discovery and spectroscopic observation of the supernovae. We also present an offline selection of the SN candidates which aims at identifying and eliminating potential selection biases.
Even at extragalactic distances, the shape of supernova ejecta can be effectively diagnosed by spectropolarimetry. We present here results for 17 Type Ia supernovae that allow a statistical study of the correlation among the geometric structures and other observable parameters of Type Ia supernovae. These observations suggest that their ejecta typically consist of a smooth, central iron rich core and an outer layer with chemical asymmetries. The degree of this peripheral asphericity is correlated with the light-curve decline rate of Type Ia supernovae. These observations lend strong support to delayed-detonation models of Type Ia supernovae.
Matter effects on neutrino oscillations in both, a supernova and the Earth, change the observed supernova neutrino spectra. We calculate the expected number of supernova neutrino interactions for ICARUS, SK and SNO detectors as a function of the distance which they traveled in the Earth. Calculations are performed for supernova type II at 10kpc from the Earth, using standard supernova neutrino fluxes described by thermal Fermi--Dirac distributions and the PREM I Earth matter density profile.
Beyond-the-Standard-Model interactions of neutrinos among themselves -- {\it secret interactions} -- in the supernova core may prevent the shock revival, halting the supernova explosion. Besides, if supernova neutrinos en route to Earth undergo secret interactions with relic neutrinos, the neutrino burst reaching Earth may be down-scattered in energy, falling below the detection threshold. We probe secret neutrino interactions through supernova neutrinos and apply our findings to the supernova SN 1987A. We place the most stringent bounds on secret interactions occurring through a new mediator with mass between 10 MeV and 15 GeV.
We systematically investigate the effects of high supernova kick velocities on the orbital parameters of post-supernova neutron-star binaries. Using Monte- Carlo simulations, we determine the post-supernova distributions of orbital parameters for progeneitors of HMXBs and LMXBs. With the recent distribution of pulsar birth velocities by Lyne & Lorimer (1994), only about 27% of massive systems remain bound after the supernova, of which about 26% immediately experience dynamical mass transfer and possibly merge to become Thorne-Zytkow objects. The correlations between various orbital parameters can be compared with observational samples to yield information about supernova kick velocities and pre-supernova orbital-period distributions. After the supernova, the spins of most stars in massive systems have large inclinations with respect to their orbital axes, and a significant fraction of systems (about 20%) contain stars with retrograde spins. In the case of low-mass companions, we find that about 19% of systems remain bound after the supernova, of which about 57% experience immediate dynamical mass transfer. There is a tight correlation between the eccentricity and the post-supernova orbital period in LMXB progeneitors. All LMXBs with post-supernova periods longer than a few days initially have large eccentricities (e.g. Cir X-1 is discussed in this context). We use the results of these calculations to simulate the sky distributions of HMXBs and LMXBs. The simulated distributions agree with observed samples. Most importantly, the distribution of Galactic LMXBs is consistent with an ordinary Galactic disk population which has been widened because of large supernova kicks and does not require a special population of progenitors.
In this article, a broad perspective of supernovae, their classification and mechanism is given. Later, the astrophysical significance of supernovae is discussed in brief.
Overwhelming evidence has accumulated in recent years that supernova explosions are intrinsically 3-dimensional phenomena with significant departures from spherical symmetry. We review the evidence derived from spectropolarimetry that has established several key results: virtually all supernovae are significantly aspherical near maximum light; core-collapse supernovae behave differently than thermonuclear (Type Ia) supernovae; the asphericity of core-collapse supernovae is stronger in the inner layers showing that the explosion process itself is strongly aspherical; core-collapse supernovae tend to establish a preferred direction of asymmetry; the asphericity is stronger in the outer layers of thermonuclear supernovae providing constraints on the burning process. We emphasize the utility of the Q/U plane as a diagnostic tool and revisit SN 1987A and SN 1993J in a contemporary context. An axially-symmetric geometry can explain many basic features of core-collapse supernovae, but significant departures from axial symmetry are needed to explain most events. We introduce a spectropolarimetry type to classify the range of behavior observed in polarized supernovae. Understanding asymmetries in supernovae is important for phenomena as diverse as the origins of gamma-ray bursts and the cosmological applications of Type Ia supernovae in studies of the dark energy content of the universe.
Among type IIP supernovae there are a few events that resemble the well-studied supernova 1987A produced by the blue supergiant in the Large Magellanic Cloud. We study a peculiar supernova 2000cb and compare it with the supernova 1987A. We carried out hydrodynamic simulations of the supernova in an extended parameter space to describe its light curve and spectroscopic data. The hydrogen H-alpha and H-beta lines are modeled using a time-dependent approach. We constructed the hydrodynamic model by fitting the photometric and spectroscopic observations. We infer a presupernova radius of 35 Rsun, an ejecta mass of 22.3 Msun, an explosion energy of 4.4x10^{51} erg, and a radioactive Ni-56 mass of 0.083 Msun. The estimated progenitor mass on the main sequence lies in the range of 24-28 Msun. The early H-alpha profile on day 7 is consistent with the density distribution found from hydrodynamic modeling, while the H-alpha line on day 40 indicates an extended Ni-56 mixing up to a velocity of 8400 km/s. We emphasize that the dome-like light curves of both supernova 2000cb and supernova 1987A are entirely powered by radioactive decay. This is unlike normal type IIP supernovae, the plateau of which is dominated by the internal energy deposited after the shock wave propagation through the presupernova. We find signatures of the explosion asymmetry in the photospheric and nebular spectra. The explosion energy of supernova 2000cb is higher by a factor of three compared to supernova 1987A, which poses a serious problem for explosion mechanisms of type IIP supernovae.
We investigate the nature of multiple supernova hosting galaxies, and the types of events which they produce. Using all known historical supernovae, we split host galaxies into samples containing single or multiple events. These samples are then characterised in terms of their relative supernova fractions, and host properties. In multiple supernova hosts the ratio of type Ia to core-collapse events is lower than in single supernova hosts. For core-collapse events there is a suggestion that the ratio of types Ibc to type II events is higher in multiples than within single supernova hosts. This second increase is dominated by an increase in the number of SNIb. Within multiple supernova hosts, supernovae of any given type appear to 'prefer' to explode in galaxies that are host to the same type of SN. We also find that multiple SN hosts have higher T-type morphologies. While our results suffer from low number statistics, we speculate that their simplest interpretation is that star formation within galaxies is generally of an episodic and bursty nature. This leads to the supernovae detected within any particular galaxy to be dominated by those with progenitors of a specific age, rather than a random selection from standard relative supernova rates, as the latter would be expected if star formation was of a long-term continuous nature. We further discuss the supernova progenitor and star formation properties that may be important for understanding these trends, and also comment on a range of important selection effects within our sample.
Supernovae play an integral role in the feedback of processed material into the ISMof galaxies and are responsible for most of the chemical enrichment of the universe. The rate of supernovae can also reveal the star formation histories. Supernova rate is usually measured through the non-thermal radio continuum luminosity, but in this paper we establish a quantitative relationship between the [FeII]1.26 luminosity and supernova rate in a sample of 11 near-by starburst galaxies. SINFONI data cubes are used to perform a pixel pixel analysis of this correlation. Using Br equivalent width and luminosity as the only observational inputs into Starburst 99, the supernova rate is derived at each pixel and a map of supernova rate is created. This is then compared morphologically and quantitatively to [FeII]1.26 luminosity map. We find a strong linear and morphological correlation between supernova rate and [FeII]1.26 on a pixel-pixel basis: log SNrate yr-1 pc-2 = (1.01 \pm 0.2) \ast log[FeII]1.26 ergs-1 pc-2 - 41.17 \pm 0.9 The Starburst 99 derived supernova rates are also in good agreement with the radio derived supernova rates, which further demonstrates the strength of [FeII] as a tracer of supernova rate. With the strong correlation found in this sample of galaxies, we now qualitatively use [FeII]1.26 to derive supernova rate on either a pixel-pixel or integrated galactic basis.
The subject of late-time emission of Type Ia supernovae and its implications for the understanding of the explosions of C+O WDs is reviewed.
We estimate gamma-ray fluxes due to the decay of nuclei beyond Bi209 from a supernova or a supernova remnant assuming that the r-process occurs in supernovae. We find that a detector with a sensitivity of about 10**(-7) photons/cm**2/s at energies of 40 keV to 3 MeV may detect fluxes due to the decay of Ra226, Th229, Am241, Am243, Cf249, and Cf251 in the newly discovered supernova remnant near Vela. In addition, such a detector may detect fluxes due to the decay of Ac227 and Ra228 produced in a future supernova at a distance of about 1 kpc. As nuclei with mass numbers A > 209 are produced solely by the r-process, such detections are the best proof for a supernova r-process site. Further, they provide the most direct information on yields of progenitor nuclei with A > 209 at r-process freeze-out. Finally, detection of fluxes due to the decay of r-process nuclei over a range of masses from a supernova or a supernova remnant provides the opportunity to compare yields in a single supernova event with the solar r-process abundance pattern.
After reviewing recent work on the dynamics of young supernova remnants (YSNRs) and discussing how YSNRs can be used as physics laboratories, I discuss several challenges: Where are the very young SNRs in the Galaxy? Can very young SNRs produce gamma ray bursts? The Connections Challenge: Can one infer the nature of the supernova and its progenitor star from observations of the YSNR?
The "standard candle method" for Type II plateau supernovae produces a Hubble diagram with a dispersion of 0.3 mag, which implies that this technique can produce distances with a precision of 15%. Using four nearby supernovae with Cepheid distances I find Ho(V)=75+/-7, and Ho(I)=65+/-12.
We briefly describe the current version of the PHOENIX code. We then present some results on the modeling of Type II supernovae and show that fits to observations can be obtained, when account is taken for spherically symmetric, line-blanketed, expanding atmospheres. We describe the SEAM method of obtaining distances to supernovae and briefly discuss its future prospects.
I review the unwrapping story the SN 1987A explosion event, and the main discoveries associated with it. I will show that, although this supernova is somewhat peculiar, the study of SN 1987A has clarified quite a number of important aspects of the nature and the properties of supernovae in general.
Live 60Fe has recently been detected in a deep-ocean ferromanganese crust, isolated in layers dating from about 3 Myr ago. Since 60Fe has a mean life of 2.2 Myr, a near-Earth supernova is the only likely source for such a signal, and we explore here the consequences of a supernova origin. We combine the 60Fe data with several supernova nucleosynthesis models to calculate the supernova distance as a function of progenitor mass, finding an allowed range of 15-120 pc. We also predict the signals expected for several other radioisotopes, which are independent of the supernova distance. Species likely to be present near or above background levels are 10Be, 26Al, 53Mn, 182Hf and 244Pu. Of these, 182Hf and 244Pu are nearly background-free, presenting the best opportunities to provide strong confirmation of the supernova origin of the 60Fe signal, and to demonstrate that at least some supernovae are the source for the r-process. The accuracies of our predictions are hampered by large uncertainties in the predicted 60Fe yields for supernovae of different masses, so the new crust data motivate a redoubled theoretical attack on this problem.
Global properties of different types of supernovae are overviewed. A special emphasis is made on the issues of interest both for the supernova and cosmic ray physics such as supernova shock waves and neutrino signal.
Identifying the massive progenitor stars that give rise to core-collapse supernovae is one of the main pursuits of supernova and stellar evolution studies. In this talk I discuss some aspects of the pursuit of these progenitor stars in ground-based and Hubble Space Telescope images.
We present constraints on core-collapse supernova progenitors through observations of their environments within host galaxies. This is achieved through 2 routes. Firstly, we investigate the spatial correlation of supernovae with host galaxy star formation using pixel statistics. We find that the main supernova types form a sequence of increasing association to star formation. The most logical interpretation is that this implies an increasing progenitor mass sequence going from the supernova type Ia arising from the lowest mass, through the type II, type Ib, and the supernova type Ic arising from the highest mass progenitors. We find the surprising result that the supernova type IIn show a lower association to star formation than type IIPs, implying lower mass progenitors. Secondly, we use host HII region spectroscopy to investigate differences in environment metallicity between different core-collapse types. We find that supernovae of types Ibc arise in slightly higher metallicity environments than type II events. However, this difference is not significant, implying that progenitor metallicity does not play a dominant role in deciding supernova type.
The discovery of the extremely luminous supernova SN 2006gy, possibly interpreted as a pair instability supernova, renewed the interest in very massive stars. We explore the evolution of these objects, which end their life as pair instability supernovae or as core collapse supernovae with relatively massive iron cores, up to about $3 M_\odot$.
The spectrum and event rate of supernova relic neutrinos are calculated taking into account the dependence on the time it takes for the shock wave in supernova cores to revive. The shock revival time should depend on the still unknown explosion mechanism of collapse-driven supernovae. The contribution of black-hole-forming failed supernovae is also considered. The total event rate is higher for models with a longer shock revival time and/or a failed-supernova contribution. The hardness of the spectrum does not strongly depend on the shock revival time, but the spectrum becomes hard owing to the failed supernovae. Therefore, the shock-revival-time dependence of supernova relic neutrinos has different systematics from the fractions of failed supernovae.
Recent progress in numerical simulations of thermonuclear supernova explosions brings up a unique opportunity in studying the progenitors of Type Ia supernovae. Coupling state-of-the-art explosion models with detailed hydrodynamical simulations of the supernova remnant evolution and the most up-to-date atomic data for X-ray emission calculations makes it possible to create realistic synthetic X-ray spectra for the supernova remnant phase. Comparing such spectra with high quality observations of supernova remnants could allow to constrain the explosion mechanism and the progenitor of the supernova. The present study focuses in particular on the oxygen emission line properties in young supernova remnants, since different explosion scenarios predict a different amount and distribution of this element. Analysis of the soft X-ray spectra from supernova remnants in the Large Magellanic Cloud and confrontation with remnant models for different explosion scenarios suggests that SNR 0509-67.5 could originate from a delayed detonation explosion and SNR 0519-69.0 from an oxygen-rich merger.
The inverse-Compton X-ray emission model for supernovae has been well established to explain the X-ray properties of many supernovae for over 30 years. However, no observational case has yet been found to connect the X-rays with the optical lights as they should be. Here, we report the discovery of a hard X-ray source that is associated with a Type II-b supernova. Simultaneous emission enhancements have been found in both the X-ray and optical light curves twenty days after the supernova explosion. While the enhanced X-rays are likely dominated by inverse-Compton scatterings of the supernova's lights from the Type II-b secondary peak, we propose a scenario of a high-speed supernova ejecta colliding with a low-density pre-supernova stellar wind that produces an optically thin and high-temperature electron gas for the Comptonization. The inferred stellar wind mass-loss rate is consistent with that of the supernova progenitor candidate as a yellow supergiant detected by the Hubble Space Telescope, providing an independent proof for the progenitor. This is also new evidence of the inverse-Compton emission during the early phase of a supernova.
Supernova 1604 is the last Galactic supernova for which historical records exist. Johannes Kepler's name is attached to it, as he published a detailed account of the observations made by himself and European colleagues. Supernova 1604 was very likely a Type Ia supernova, which exploded 350 pc to 750 pc above the Galactic plane. Its supernova remnant, known as Kepler's supernova remnant, shows clear evidence for interaction with nitrogen-rich material in the north/northwest part of the remnant, which, given the height above the Galactic plane, must find its origin in mass loss from the supernova progenitor system. The combination of a Type Ia supernova and the presence of circumstellar material makes Kepler's supernova remnant a unique object to study the origin of Type Ia supernovae. The evidence suggests that the progenitor binary system of supernova 1604 consisted of a carbon- oxygen white dwarf and an evolved companion star, which most likely was in the (post) asymptotic giant branch of its evolution. A problem with this scenario is that the companion star must have survived the explosion, but no trace of its existence has yet been found, despite a deep search.   1 Introduction; 2 The supernova remnant, its distance and multiwavelength properties; 2.1 Position, distance estimates and SN1604 as a runaway system; 2.2 X-ray imaging spectroscopy and SN1604 as a Type Ia supernova 2.3 The circumstellar medium as studied in the optical and infrared; 3 The dynamics of Kepler's SNR; 3.1 Velocity measurements; 3.2 Hydrodynamical simulations; 4 The progenitor system of SN 1604; 4.1 Elevated circumstellar nitrogen abundances, silicates and a single degenerate scenario for SN1604; 4.2 Problems with a single degenerate Type Ia scenario for SN 1604; 4.3 Was SN 1604 a core-degenerate Type Ia explosion?; 4.4 What can we learn from the historical light curve of SN 1604? ; 5 Conclusions
Supernova cosmology without spectra will be an important component of future surveys such as LSST. This lack of supernova spectra results in uncertainty in the redshifts which, if ignored, leads to significantly biased estimates of cosmological parameters. Here we present a hierarchical Bayesian formalism -- zBEAMS -- that addresses this problem by marginalising over the unknown or uncertain supernova redshifts to produce unbiased cosmological estimates that are competitive with supernova data with spectroscopically confirmed redshifts. zBEAMS provides a unified treatment of both photometric redshifts and host galaxy misidentification (occurring due to chance galaxy alignments or faint hosts), effectively correcting the inevitable contamination in the Hubble diagram. Like its predecessor BEAMS, our formalism also takes care of non-Ia supernova contamination by marginalising over the unknown supernova type. We illustrate this technique with simulations of supernovae with photometric redshifts and host galaxy misidentification. A novel feature of the photometric redshift case is the important role played by the redshift distribution of the supernovae.
Neutrinos play a key role in core-collapse supernova explosions. Carrying information from deep inside the stellar core, neutrinos are direct probes of the supernova mechanism. Intriguing recent developments on the role of neutrinos in supernovae are reviewed, as well as our current understanding of the flavor conversions in the stellar envelope, and the detection perspectives of the next burst.
Type Iax supernovae (SN Iax), also called SN 2002cx-like supernovae, are the largest class of peculiar white dwarf (thermonuclear) supernovae, with over fifty members known. SN Iax have lower ejecta velocity and lower luminosities, and these parameters span a much wider range, than normal type Ia supernovae (SN Ia). SN Iax are spectroscopically similar to some SN Ia near maximum light, but are unique among all supernovae in their late-time spectra, which never become fully nebular. SN Iax overwhelmingly occur in late-type host galaxies, implying a relatively young population. The SN Iax 2012Z is the only white dwarf supernova for which a pre-explosion progenitor system has been detected. A variety of models have been proposed, but one leading scenario has emerged: a type Iax supernova may be a pure-deflagration explosion of a carbon-oxygen (or hybrid carbon-oxygen-neon) white dwarf, triggered by helium accretion to the Chandrasekhar mass, that does not necessarily fully disrupt the star.
We present results of a supernova light-curve population synthesis, predicting the range of possible supernova lightcurves arising from a population of progenitor stars that include interacting binary systems. We show that the known diversity of supernova lightcurves can be interpreted as arising from binary interactions. Given detailed models of the progenitor stars, we are able to the determine what parameters within these stars determine the shape of their supernova lightcurve. The primary factors are the mass of supernova ejecta and the mass of hydrogen in the final progenitor. We find that there is a continuum of light-curve behaviour from type IIP, IIL to IIb supernovae related to the range of hydrogen and ejecta masses. Most type IIb supernovae arise from a relatively narrow range of initial masses from 10 to 15 M$_{\odot}$. We also find a few distinct lightcurves that are the result of stellar mergers.
Besides supernovae, few astrophysical processes can release close to 10^51 erg of energy. A growing number of stellar outbursts are now recognised to have energy releases matching those of faint supernovae. These transients can be triggered by a variety of mechanisms, and their discrimination is sometimes a tricky issue.
Supernovae are among the most magnificent events in the observable universe. They produce many of the chemical elements necessary for life to exist and their remnants---neutron stars and black holes---are interesting astrophysical objects in their own right. However, despite millennia of observations and almost a century of astrophysical study, the explosion mechanism of supernovae is not yet well understood. Hyper-Kamiokande is a next-generation neutrino detector that will be able to observe the neutrino flux from the next galactic supernova in unprecedented detail. In this thesis, I investigate how well such an observation would allow us to reconstruct the explosion mechanism. I develop a high-precision supernova event generator and use a detailed detector simulation and event reconstruction to explore Hyper-Kamiokande's response to five supernova models simulated by different groups around the world. I show that 300 neutrino events in Hyper-Kamiokande---corresponding to a supernova at a distance of at least 60 kpc---are sufficient to distinguish between these models with high accuracy. These findings indicate that, once the next galactic supernova happens, Hyper-Kamiokande will be able to determine details of the supernova explosion mechanism.
We report our first discoveries of high-redshift supernovae from the Subaru HIgh-Z sUpernova CAmpaign (SHIZUCA), the transient survey using Subaru/Hyper Suprime-Cam. We report the discovery of three supernovae at the spectroscopically-confirmed redshifts of 2.399 (HSC16adga), 1.965 (HSC17auzg), and 1.851 (HSC17dbpf), and two supernova candidates with the host-galaxy photometric redshifts of 3.2 (HSC16apuo) and 4.2 (HSC17dsid), respectively. In this paper, we present their photometric properties and the spectroscopic properties of the confirmed high-redshift supernovae are presented in the accompanying paper (Curtin et al. 2019). The supernovae with the confirmed redshifts of z ~ 2 have the rest ultraviolet peak magnitudes close to -21 mag and they are likely superluminous supernovae. The discovery of three supernovae at z ~ 2 roughly corresponds to the approximate event rate of ~ 900 +/- 520 Gpc-3 yr-1 with Poisson error, which is consistent with the total superluminous supernova rate estimated by extrapolating the local rate based on the cosmic star-formation history. Adding unconfirmed superluminous supernova candidates would increase the event rate. Our superluminous supernova candidates at the redshifts of around 3 and 4 indicate the approximate superluminous supernova rates of ~ 400 +/- 400 Gpc-3 yr-1 (z ~ 3) and ~ 500 +/- 500 Gpc-3 yr-1 (z ~ 4) with Poisson errors. Our initial results demonstrate the outstanding capability of Hyper Suprime-Cam to discover high-redshift supernovae.
Massive star supernovae can be divided into four categories depending on the amount of mass loss from the progenitor star and the star's radius: red supergiant stars with most of the H envelope intact (SN IIP), stars with some H but most lost (IIL, IIb), stars with all H lost (Ib, Ic), and blue supergiant stars with a massive H envelope (SN 1987A-like). Various aspects of the immediate aftermath of the supernova are expected to develop in different ways depending on the supernova category: mixing in the supernova, fallback on the central compact object, expansion of any pulsar wind nebula, interaction with circumstellar matter, and photoionization by shock breakout radiation. The observed properties of young supernova remnants allow many of them to be placed in one of the supernova categories; all the categories are represented except for the SN 1987A-like type. Of the remnants with central pulsars, the pulsar properties do not appear to be related to the supernova category. There is no evidence that the supernova categories form a mass sequence, as would be expected in a single star scenario for the evolution. Models for young pulsar wind nebulae expanding into supernova ejecta indicate initial pulsar periods of 10-100 ms and approximate equipartition between particle and magnetic energies. Ages are obtained for pulsar nebulae, including an age of 2400 pm 500 yr for 3C58, which is not consistent with an origin in SN 1181. There is no evidence that mass fallback plays a role in neutron star properties.
High-z Type Ia supernovae are expected to be gravitationally lensed by the foreground distribution of large-scale structure. The resulting magnification of supernovae is statistically measurable, and the angular correlation of the magnification pattern directly probes the integrated mass density along the line of sight. Measurements of cosmic magnification of supernovae therefore complements galaxy shear measurements in providing a direct measure of clustering of the dark matter. As the number of supernovae is typically much smaller than the number of sheared galaxies, the two-point correlation function of lensed Type Ia supernovae suffers from significantly increased shot noise. Neverthless, we find that the magnification map of a large sample of supernovae, such as that expected from next generation dedicated searches, will be easily measurable and provide an important cosmological tool. For example, a search over 20 sq. deg. over five years leading to a sample of ~ 10,000 supernovae would measure the angular power spectrum of cosmic magnification with a cumulative signal-to-noise ratio of ~20. This detection can be further improved once the supernova distance measurements are cross-correlated with measurements of the foreground galaxy distribution. The magnification maps made using supernovae can be used for important cross-checks with traditional lensing shear statistics obtained in the same fields, as well as help to control systematics. We discuss two applications of supernova magnification maps: the breaking of the mass-sheet degeneracy when estimating masses of shear-detected clusters, and constraining the second-order corrections to weak lensing observables.
We review VLBI observations of supernovae over the last quarter century and discuss the prospect of imaging future supernovae with space VLBI in the context of VSOP-2. From thousands of discovered supernovae, most of them at cosmological distances, ~50 have been detected at radio wavelengths, most of them in relatively nearby galaxies. All of the radio supernovae are Type II or Ib/c, which originate from the explosion of massive progenitor stars. Of these, 12 were observed with VLBI and four of them, SN 1979C, SN 1986J, SN 1993J, and SN 1987A, could be imaged in detail, the former three with VLBI. In addition, supernovae or young supernova remnants were discovered at radio wavelengths in highly dust-obscured galaxies, such as M82, Arp 299, and Arp 220, and some of them could also be imaged in detail. Four of the supernovae so far observed were sufficiently bright to be detectable with VSOP-2. With VSOP-2 the expansion of supernovae can be monitored and investiated with unsurpassed angular resolution, starting as early as the time of the supernova's transition from its opaque to transparent stage. Such studies can reveal, in a movie, the aftermath of a supernova explosion shortly after shock breakout.
Large synoptic (repeated scan) imaging sky surveys are poised to observe enormous numbers of core-collapse supernovae. We quantify the discovery potential of upcoming projects, including DES, Pan-STARRS, and LSST. These surveys will map out the cosmic core-collapse supernova redshift distribution via direct counting, with very small statistical uncertainties out to a redshift depth which is a strong function of the survey limiting magnitude. This supernova redshift history encodes rich information about cosmology, star formation, and supernova astrophysics and phenomenology; the large statistics of the supernova sample will be crucial to disentangle possible degeneracies among these issues. For example, the cosmic supernova rate can be measured to high precision out to z ~ 0.5 for all core-collapse types, and out to redshift z ~ 1 for Type IIn events. Because of the tight link between supernovae and star formation, synoptic sky surveys will provide precision measurements of the normalization and z < 1 history of cosmic star-formation rate in a manner independent of and complementary to current methods. Furthermore, Type II supernovae can serve as distance indicators and would independently cross-check Type Ia distances measured in the same surveys. Arguably the largest and least-controlled uncertainty in these efforts comes from dust obscuration of supernovae in their host galaxies; we outline a strategy to determine empirically the obscuration properties by leveraging the large supernova samples over a broad range of redshift. [abstract abridged]
In the dense stellar environment of the globular clusters, compact binaries are produced dynamically. Therefore the fraction of type Ia supernovae that explode in globular clusters is expected to be higher than the fraction of mass residing in these. We have searched for globular clusters at the positions of observed type Ia supernovae. We used archival HST images and literature data, covering the positions either before the supernovae exploded, or long enough after that the supernovae have faded below the luminosities of globular clusters. We did not find evidence for globular clusters at any of the supernova positions. For 18 type Ia supernovae, the observations are sensitive enough that any globular cluster would have been detected, and for further 17 type Ia supernovae, the brighter globular clusters would have been detected. Correcting for incompleteness, we derive a 90% upper limit of 0.09 on the fraction of type Ia supernovae that explode in globular clusters for the full sample and 0.22 for the sample of supernovae in late-type galaxies. This allows us to limit enhancements per unit stellar mass for a coeval population eta_{co}<50 (100) with 90% (99%) confidence. We find that by observing the positions of a sample of less than 100 type Ia supernovae in the outer parts of early-type galaxies, it will be possible to probe the currently favoured range of eta_{co}~1-10.
It has been realized that the shock wave effects play an important role in neutrino oscillations during the supernova explosion. In recent years, with the development of simulations about supernova explosion, we have a better understanding about the density profiles and the shock waves in supernovae than before. It has been shown that the appearance of shock waves not only varies with time, but is also affected by the mass of the supernova. When the mass of the supernova happens to be in a certain range (e.g. it equals 10.8 times the mass of the sun), there might be a reverse shock wave, another sudden change of density except the forward shock wave, emerging in the supernova. In addition, there are some other time-dependent changes of density profiles in different supernova models. Because of these complex density profiles, the expression of the crossing probability at the high resonance, $P_H$, which we used previously would be no longer applicable. In order to get more accurate and reasonable results, we use the data of density profiles in three different supernova models obtained from simulations to study the variations of $P_s$ (the survival probability of $\nu_e\rightarrow\nu_e$), as well as $P_c$ (the conversion probability of $\nu_x\rightarrow\nu_e$). It is found that the mass of the supernova does make a difference on the behavior of $P_s$, and affects $P_c$ at the same time. With the results of $P_s$ and $P_c$, we can estimate the number of $\nu_e$ remained after they go through the matter in the supernova.
Many core-collapse supernova progenitors are presumed to be in binary systems. If a star explodes in a binary system, the early supernova light curve can be brightened by the collision of the supernova ejecta with the companion star. The early brightening can be observed when the observer is in the direction of the hole created by the collision. Based on a population synthesis model, we estimate the fractions of core-collapse supernovae in which the light-curve brightening by the collision can be observed. We find that 0.19% of core-collapse supernova light curves can be observed with the collisional brightening. Type Ibc supernova light curves are more likely to be brightened by the collision (0.53%) because of the high fraction of the progenitors being in binary systems and their proximity to the companion stars. Type II and IIb supernova light curves are less affected (~1e-3% and ~1e-2%, respectively). Although the early, slow light-curve declines of some Type IIb and Ibc supernovae are argued to be caused by the collision with the companion star (e.g. SN 2008D), the small expected fraction, as well as the unrealistically small separation required, disfavour the argument. The future transient survey by the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope is expected to detect ~10 Type Ibc supernovae with the early collisional brightening per year, and they will be able to provide information on supernova progenitors in binary systems.
Molecular cloud structure is regulated by stellar feedback in various forms. Two of the most important feedback processes are UV photoionisation and supernovae from massive stars. However, the precise response of the cloud to these processes, and the interaction between them, remains an open question. In particular, we wish to know under which conditions the cloud can be dispersed by feedback, which in turn can give us hints as to how feedback regulates the star formation inside the cloud. We perform a suite of radiative magnetohydrodynamic simulations of a 10^5 solar mass cloud with embedded sources of ionising radiation and supernovae, including multiple supernovae and a hypernova model. A UV source corresponding to 10% of the mass of the cloud is required to disperse the cloud, suggesting that the star formation efficiency should be on the order of 10%. A single supernova is unable to significantly affect the evolution of the cloud. However, energetic hypernovae and multiple supernovae are able to add significant quantities of momentum to the cloud, approximately 10^{43} g cm/s of momentum per 10^{51} ergs of supernova energy. This is on the lower range of estimates in other works, since dense gas clumps that remain embedded inside the HII region cause rapid cooling in the supernova blast. We argue that supernovae alone are unable to regulate star formation in molecular clouds, and that strong pre-supernova feedback is required to allow supernova blastwaves to propagate efficiently into the interstellar medium
We present synthetic light curves of fallback-powered supernovae based on a neutrino-driven explosion of a 40 Msun zero-metallicity star with significant fallback accretion onto a black hole that was previously simulated by Chan et al. (2018) until shock breakout. Here, we investigate the light curve properties of the explosion after shock breakout for various fallback models. Without extra power from fallback accretion, the light curve is that of a Type IIP supernova with a plateau magnitude of around -14 mag and a plateau duration of 40 days. With extra power for the light curve from fallback accretion, however, we find that the transient can be significantly more luminous. The light-curve shape can be SN 1987A-like or Type IIP-like, depending on the efficiency of the fallback engine. If the accretion disk forms soon after the collapse and more than 1% of the accretion energy is released as the central engine, fallback accretion powered supernovae become as luminous as superluminous supernovae. We suggest that Type II superluminous supernovae with broad hydrogen features could be related to such hydrogen-rich supernovae powered by fallback accretion. In the future, such superluminous supernovae powered by fallback accretion might be found among the supernovae from the first stars in addition to pair-instability supernovae and pulstational pair-instability supernovae.
Deep, ground based, optical wide-field supernova searches are capable of detecting a large number of supernovae over a broad redshift range up to z~1.5. While it is practically unfeasible to obtain spectroscopic redshifts of all the supernova candidates right after the discovery, we show that the magnitudes and colors of the host galaxies, as well as the supernovae, can be used to select high-z supernova candidates, for subsequent spectroscopic and photometric follow-up.   Using Monte-Carlo simulations we construct criteria for selecting galaxies in well-defined redshift bands. For example, with a selection criteria using B-R and R-I colors we are able to pick out potential host galaxies for which z>0.85 with 80% confidence level and with a selection efficiency of 64-86%. The method was successfully tested using real observations from the HDF.   Similarly, we show that that the magnitude and colors of the supernova discovery data can be used to constrain the redshift. With a set of cuts based on V-R and R-I in a search to m_I~25, supernovae at z~1 can be selected in a redshift interval sigma_z <0.15.
The unique elemental abundance pattern of the carbon-rich stars CS29498-043 and CS22949-037 is characterized by a large excess of magnesium and silicon in comparison with iron. This excess is investigated in the context of a supernova-induced star formation scenario, and it is concluded that these stars were born from the matter swept up by supernova remnants containing little iron and that such supernovae are similar to the least-luminous SNe ever observed, SNe 1997D and 1999br. Comparison of the observed abundance pattern in iron-group elements of subluminous supernovae with those of other supernovae leads to an intriguing implication for explosion, nucleosynthesis, and mixing in supernovae. The observed invariance of these ratios can not be accounted for by a spherically symmetric supernova model.
Winds blown from accretion disks formed inside massive rotating stars may result in stellar explosions observable as Type Ibc and Type II supernovae. A key feature of the winds is their ability to produce the radioactive Nickel-56 necessary to power a supernova light curve. The wind strength depends on accretion disk cooling by neutrino emission and photo-disintegration of bound nuclei. These cooling processes depend on the angular momentum of the stellar progenitor via the virial temperature at the Kepler radius where the disk forms. The production of an observable supernova counterpart to a Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB) may therefore depend on the angular momentum of the stellar progenitor. Stars with low angular momentum may produce a GRB without making an observable supernova. Stars with large angular momentum may make extremely bright and energetic supernovae like SN 1998bw. Stars with an intermediate range of angular momentum may simultaneously produce a supernova and a GRB.
The available historical records of supernovae occurring in our own Galaxy over the past two thousand years are reviewed. These accounts include the well-recorded supernovae of AD 1604 (Kepler's SN), 1572 (Tycho's SN), 1181, 1054 (which produced the Crab Nebula) and 1006, together with less certain events dating back to AD 185. In the case of the supernovae of AD 1604 and 1572 it is European records that provide the most accurate information available, whereas for earlier supernovae records are principally from East Asian sources. Also discussed briefly are several spurious supernova candidates, and the future prospects for studies of historical supernovae.
As the shock and expanding shell of a supernova plow out through the circumstellar material at thousands of km/s, radio emission is generated. VLBI observations of this radio emission are presently the only means to directly image the expanding shell of any supernova much farther away than SN 1987A. The last decade has seen great progress in VLBI imaging of radio supernovae. In particular, SN 1993J in the galaxy M81 provided a rare opportunity to closely study an expanding supernova, and has been intensively observed. I summarize some of the results on SN 1993J and other radio supernovae, and compare the different observed radio supernovae. I briefly discuss the future prospects of radio supernovae imaging.
Recent studies of core-collapse supernovae have revealed the existence of two distinct classes of massive supernovae (SNe): 1) very energetic SNe (Hypernovae), whose kinetic energy (KE) exceeds $10^{52}$ erg, about 10 times the KE of normal core-collapse SNe, and 2) very faint and low energy SNe (E < 0.5 $\times$ $10^{51}$ erg; Faint supernovae). These two classes of supernovae are likely to be "black-hole-forming" supernovae with rotating or non-rotating black holes. We compare their nucleosynthesis yields with the abundances of extremely metal-poor (EMP) stars to identify the Pop III (or first) supernovae. We show that the EMP stars, especially the C-rich type, are likely to be enriched by black-hole-forming supernovae.
We present the results of applying new object classification techniques to difference images in the context of the Nearby Supernova Factory supernova search. Most current supernova searches subtract reference images from new images, identify objects in these difference images, and apply simple threshold cuts on parameters such as statistical significance, shape, and motion to reject objects such as cosmic rays, asteroids, and subtraction artifacts. Although most static objects subtract cleanly, even a very low false positive detection rate can lead to hundreds of non-supernova candidates which must be vetted by human inspection before triggering additional followup. In comparison to simple threshold cuts, more sophisticated methods such as Boosted Decision Trees, Random Forests, and Support Vector Machines provide dramatically better object discrimination. At the Nearby Supernova Factory, we reduced the number of non-supernova candidates by a factor of 10 while increasing our supernova identification efficiency. Methods such as these will be crucial for maintaining a reasonable false positive rate in the automated transient alert pipelines of upcoming projects such as PanSTARRS and LSST.
The most luminous Supernova SN2006gy (more than a 100 times brighter than a typical supernova) has been a challenge to explain by standard models. For example, pair instability supernovae which are luminous enough seem to have too slow a rise, and core collapse supernovae do not seem to be luminous enough. We present an alternative scenario involving the quark-nova phenomenon (an explosive transition of the newly born neutron star to a quark star) in which a second explosion (delayed) occurs inside the ejecta of a normal supernova. The reheated supernova ejecta can radiate at higher levels for longer periods of time primarily due to reduced adiabatic expansion losses, unlike the standard supernova case. We find an encouraging match between the resulting lightcurve and that observed in the case of SN2006gy suggesting that we might have at hand the first ever signature of a quark-nova. Successful application of our model to SN2005gj and SN2005ap is also presented.
VLBI is the only technology that will allow sub-milliarcsecond resolution imaging in the near future. As such, it is the only way to image expanding supernovae in nearby galaxies. Such images potentially allow us to study the early evolution of neutron stars or black holes left behind by core-collapse supernovae, the circumstellar wind history of the supernova progenitor stars, the shock acceleration of cosmic-ray particles in supernovae as well as the evolutionary process by which supernova shells merge into, and enrich, the ISM. I will discuss the results of the on-going VLBI imaging campaigns on supernovae 1986J and 1993J. I will also discuss the impact on supernova VLBI of the proposed South-African Karoo Array Telescope and Australian ASKAP arrays, as well as the SKA itself, as these telescopes will greatly increase the sensitivity of the global VLBI network.
Photometry data were collected from the literature and analyzed for supernovae that are thought to have a gamma-ray burst association. There are several gamma-ray burst afterglow light curves that appear to have a supernova component. For these light curves, the supernova component was extracted and analyzed. A supernova light curve model was used to help determine the peak absolute magnitudes as well as estimates for the kinetic energy, ejected mass and nickel mass in the explosion. The peak absolute magnitudes are, on average, brighter than those of similar supernovae (stripped-envelope supernovae) that do not have a gamma-ray burst association, but this can easily be due to a selection effect. However, the kinetic energies and ejected masses were found to be considerably higher, on average, than those of similar supernovae without a gamma-ray burst association.
We present a core-collapse supernova model for the extremely luminous Type Ic supernova 2007bi. By performing numerical calculations of hydrodynamics, nucleosynthesis, and radiation transport, we find that SN 2007bi is consistent with the core-collapse supernova explosion of a 43 Msun carbon and oxygen core obtained from the evolution of a progenitor star with a main sequence mass of 100 Msun and metallicity of Z = Zsun/200, from which its hydrogen and helium envelopes are artificially stripped. The ejecta mass and the ejecta kinetic energy of the models are 40 Msun and 3.6*10^{52} erg. The ejected 56Ni mass is as large as 6.1 Msun, which results from the explosive nucleosynthesis with large explosion energy. We also confirm that SN 2007bi is consistent with a pair-instability supernova model as has recently been claimed. We show that the earlier light curve data can discriminate between the models for such luminous supernovae.
We present a forecast of dark energy constraints that could be obtained from a large sample of distances to Type Ia supernovae detected and measured from space. We simulate the supernova events as they would be observed by a EUCLID-like telescope with its two imagers, assuming those would be equipped with 4 visible and 3 near infrared swappable filters. We account for known systematic uncertainties affecting the cosmological constraints, including those arising through the training of the supernova model used to fit the supernovae light curves. Using conservative assumptions and Planck priors, we find that a 18 month survey would yield constraints on the dark energy equation of state comparable to the cosmic shear approach in EUCLID: a variable two-parameter equation of state can be constrained to ~0.03 at z~0.3. These constraints are derived from distances to about 13,000 supernovae out to z=1.5, observed in two cones of 10 and 50 deg^2. These constraints do not require measuring a nearby supernova sample from the ground. Provided swappable filters can be accommodated on EUCLID, distances to supernovae can be measured from space and contribute to obtain the most precise constraints on dark energy properties.
Supernovae arise from progenitor stars occupying the upper end of the initial mass function. Their extreme brightness allows individual massive stars to be detected at cosmic distances, lending supernovae great potential as tracers of the upper end of the IMF and its evolution. Exploiting this potential requires progress in many areas of supernova science. These include understanding the progenitor masses that produce various types of supernovae and accurately characterizing the supernova outburst and the environment in which it was produced. I present some preliminary work identifying the environmental conditions that produce the most luminous supernovae, believed to arise from stars with masses greater than 100 M_sun. I illustrate that the presence of these extreme supernovae in small star-forming dwarfs can be used to test our understanding of the upper end of the IMF.
Supernova rates are directly coupled to high mass stellar birth and evolution. As such, they are one of the few direct measures of the history of cosmic stellar evolution. In this paper we describe an probabilistic technique for identifying supernovae within spectroscopic samples of galaxies. We present a study of 52 type Ia supernovae ranging in age from -14 days to +40 days extracted from a parent sample of \simeq 50,000 spectra from the SDSS DR5. We find a Supernova Rate (SNR) of 0.472^{+0.048}_{-0.039}(Systematic)^{+0.081}_{-0.071}(Statistical)SNu at a redshift of <z> = 0.1. This value is higher than other values at low redshift at the 1{\sigma}, but is consistent at the 3{\sigma} level. The 52 supernova candidates used in this study comprise the third largest sample of supernovae used in a type Ia rate determination to date. In this paper we demonstrate the potential for the described approach for detecting supernovae in future spectroscopic surveys.
Core-collapse supernovae are among Nature's grandest explosions. They are powered by the energy released in gravitational collapse and include a rich set of physical phenomena involving all fundamental forces and many branches of physics and astrophysics. We summarize the current state of core-collapse supernova theory and discuss the current set of candidate explosion mechanisms under scrutiny as core-collapse supernova modeling is moving towards self-consistent three-dimensional simulations. Recent work in nuclear theory and neutron star mass and radius measurements are providing new constraints for the nuclear equation of state. We discuss these new developments and their impact on core-collapse supernova modeling. Neutrino-neutrino forward scattering in the central regions of core-collapse supernovae can lead to collective neutrino flavor oscillations that result in swaps of electron and heavy-lepton neutrino spectra. We review the rapid progress that is being made in understanding these collective oscillations and their potential impact on the core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism.
The observed association between supernovae and gamma-ray bursts represents a cornerstone in our understanding of the nature of gamma-ray bursts. The collapsar model provides a theoretical framework for this connection. A key element is the launch of a bi-polar jet (seen as a gamma-ray burst). The resulting hot cocoon disrupts the star while the 56Ni produced gives rise to radioactive heating of the ejecta, seen as a supernova. In this discussion paper I summarise the observational status of the supernova/gamma-ray burst connection in the context of the 'engine' picture of jet-driven supernovae and highlight SN 2012bz/GRB 120422A -- with its luminous supernova but intermediate high-energy luminosity -- as a possible transition object between low-luminosity and jet gamma-ray bursts. The jet channel for supernova explosions may provide new insight into supernova explosions in general.
We present the first 3-dimensional simulations following the evolution of supernova shocks from their inception in the stellar core through the development of a supernova remnant into the Sedov phase. Our set of simulations use two different progenitors and two different conditions for the structure of the circumstellar environment. These calculations demonstrate the role that supernova instabilities (the instabilities that develop as the shock drive through the star) play in defining the structure and long-term development of instabilities in supernova remnants. We also present a first investigation of the mixing between stellar and interstellar matter as the supernova evolves into a young supernova remnant.
Core-collapse supernovae are powerful neutrino sources. The observation of a future (extra-)galactic supernova explosion or of the relic supernova neutrinos might provide important information on the supernova dynamics, on the supernova formation rate and on neutrino properties. One might learn more about unknown neutrino properties either from indirect effects in the supernova (e.g. on the explosion or on in the r-process) or from modifications of the neutrino time or energy distributions in a detector on Earth. Here we will discuss in particular possible effects of CP violation in the lepton sector. We will also mention the interest of future neutrino-nucleus interaction measurements for the precise knowledge of supernova neutrino detector response to electron neutrinos.
We propose a new method to measure the metallicity of Type Ia supernova progenitors using Mn and Cr lines in the X-ray spectra of young supernova remnants. We show that the Mn to Cr mass ratio in Type Ia supernova ejecta is tightly correlated with the initial metallicity of the progenitor, as determined by the neutron excess of the white dwarf material before thermonuclear runaway. We use this correlation, together with the flux of the Cr and Mn Kalpha X-ray lines in the Tycho supernova remnant recently detected by Suzaku (Tamagawa et al. 2008) to derive a metallicity of log(Z) = -1.32 (+0.67,-0.33) for the progenitor of this supernova, which corresponds to log(Z/Zsun)= 0.60 (+0.31,-0.60) according to the latest determination of the solar metallicity by Asplund et al. (2005). The uncertainty in the measurement is large, but metallicities much smaller than the solar value can be confidently discarded. We discuss the implications of this result for future research on Type Ia supernova progenitors.
We present the results of a study of selection criteria to identify Type Ia supernovae photometrically in a simulated mixed sample of Type Ia supernovae and core collapse supernovae. The simulated sample is a mockup of the expected results of the Dark Energy Survey. Fits to the MLCS2k2 and SALT2 Type Ia supernova models are compared and used to help separate the Type Ia supernovae from the core collapse sample. The Dark Energy Task Force Figure of Merit (modified to include core collapse supernovae systematics) is used to discriminate among the various selection criteria. This study of varying selection cuts for Type Ia supernova candidates is the first to evaluate core collapse contamination using the Figure of Merit. Different factors that contribute to the Figure of Merit are detailed. With our analysis methods, both SALT2 and MLCS2k2 Figures of Merit improve with tighter selection cuts and higher purities, peaking at 98% purity.
We use magnetohydrodynamical simulations of converging warm neutral medium flows to analyse the formation and global evolution of magnetised and turbulent molecular clouds subject to supernova feedback from massive stars. We show that supernova feedback alone fails to disrupt entire, gravitationally bound, molecular clouds, but is able to disperse small--sized (~10 pc) regions on timescales of less than 1 Myr. Efficient radiative cooling of the supernova remnant as well as strong compression of the surrounding gas result in non-persistent energy and momentum input from the supernovae. However, if the time between subsequent supernovae is short and they are clustered, large hot bubbles form that disperse larger regions of the parental cloud. On longer timescales, supernova feedback increases the amount of gas with moderate temperatures (T~300-3000 K). Despite its inability to disrupt molecular clouds, supernova feedback leaves a strong imprint on the star formation process. We find an overall reduction of the star formation efficiency by a factor of 2 and of the star formation rate by roughly factors of 2-4.
Supernovae shape the interstellar medium, chemically enrich their host galaxies, and generate powerful interstellar shocks that drive future generations of star formation. The shock produced by a supernova event acts as a type of time machine, probing the mass loss history of the progenitor system back to ages of $\sim$ 10 000 years before the explosion, whereas supernova remnants probe a much earlier stage of stellar evolution, interacting with material expelled during the progenitor's much earlier evolution. In this chapter we will review how observations of supernova remnants allow us to infer fundamental properties of the progenitor system. We will provide detailed examples of how bulk characteristics of a remnant, such as its chemical composition and dynamics, allow us to infer properties of the progenitor evolution. In the latter half of this chapter, we will show how this exercise may be extended from individual objects to SNR as classes of objects, and how there are clear bifurcations in the dynamics and spectral characteristics of core collapse and thermonuclear supernova remnants. We will finish the chapter by touching on recent advances in the modeling of massive stars, and the implications for observable properties of supernovae and their remnants.
We present the results of three-dimensional special relativistic hydrodynamic simulations of supernova ejecta with a powerful central energy source. We assume spherical supernova ejecta freely expanding with the initial kinetic energy of $10^{51}$ erg. We performed two simulations with different total injected energies of $10^{51}$ and $10^{52}$ erg to see how the total injected energy affects the subsequent evolution of the supernova ejecta. When the injected energy well exceeds the initial kinetic energy of the supernova ejecta, the hot bubble produced by the additional energy injection overwhelms and penetrates the whole supernova ejecta, resulting in clumpy density structure. For the smaller injected energy, on the other hand, the energy deposition stops before the hot bubble breakout occurs, leaving the outer envelope well-stratified. This qualitative difference may indicate that central engine powered supernovae could be observed as two different populations, such as supernovae with and without broad-line spectral features, depending on the amount of the total injected energy with respect to the initial kinetic energy.
The explosive death of a star as a supernova is one of the most dramatic events in the Universe. Supernovae have an outsized impact on many areas of astrophysics: they are major contributors to the chemical enrichment of the cosmos and significantly influence the formation of subsequent generations of stars and the evolution of galaxies. Here we review the observational properties of thermonuclear supernovae, exploding white dwarf stars resulting from the stellar evolution of low-mass stars in close binary systems. The best known objects in this class are type Ia supernovae (SN Ia), astrophysically important in their application as standardisable candles to measure cosmological distances and the primary source of iron group elements in the Universe. Surprisingly, given their prominent role, SN Ia progenitor systems and explosion mechanisms are not fully understood; the observations we describe here provide constraints on models, not always in consistent ways. Recent advances in supernova discovery and follow-up have shown that the class of thermonuclear supernovae includes more than just SN Ia, and we characterise that diversity in this review.
We identify a "supernova rate problem": the measured cosmic core-collapse supernova rate is a factor of ~ 2 smaller (with significance ~ 2 sigma) than that predicted from the measured cosmic massive-star formation rate. The comparison is critical for topics from galaxy evolution and enrichment to the abundance of neutron stars and black holes. We systematically explore possible resolutions. The accuracy and precision of the star formation rate data and conversion to the supernova rate are well supported, and proposed changes would have far-reaching consequences. The dominant effect is likely that many supernovae are missed because they are either optically dim (low-luminosity) or dark, whether intrinsically or due to obscuration. We investigate supernovae too dim to have been discovered in cosmic surveys by a detailed study of all supernova discoveries in the local volume. If possible supernova impostors are included, then dim supernovae are common enough by fraction to solve the supernova rate problem. If they are not included, then the rate of dark core collapses is likely substantial. Other alternatives are that there are surprising changes in our understanding of star formation or supernova rates, including that supernovae form differently in small galaxies than in normal galaxies. These possibilities can be distinguished by upcoming supernova surveys, star formation measurements, searches for disappearing massive stars, and measurements of supernova neutrinos.
Type Ia supernova cosmology depends on the ability to fit and standardize observations of supernova magnitudes with an empirical model. We present here a series of new models of Type Ia Supernova spectral time series that capture a greater amount of supernova diversity than possible with the models that are currently customary. These are entitled SuperNova Empirical MOdels (\textsc{SNEMO}\footnote{https://snfactory.lbl.gov/snemo}). The models are constructed using spectrophotometric time series from $172$ individual supernovae from the Nearby Supernova Factory, comprising more than $2000$ spectra. Using the available observations, Gaussian Processes are used to predict a full spectral time series for each supernova. A matrix is constructed from the spectral time series of all the supernovae, and Expectation Maximization Factor Analysis is used to calculate the principal components of the data. K-fold cross-validation then determines the selection of model parameters and accounts for color variation in the data. Based on this process, the final models are trained on supernovae that have been dereddened using the Fitzpatrick and Massa extinction relation. Three final models are presented here: \textsc{SNEMO2}, a two-component model for comparison with current Type~Ia models; \textsc{SNEMO7}, a seven component model chosen for standardizing supernova magnitudes which results in a total dispersion of $0.100$~mag for a validation set of supernovae, of which $0.087$~mag is unexplained (a total dispersion of $0.113$~mag with unexplained dispersion of $0.097$~mag is found for the total set of training and validation supernovae); and \textsc{SNEMO15}, a comprehensive $15$ component model that maximizes the amount of spectral time series behavior captured.
Strongly lensed supernovae can be detected as multiply imaged or highly magnified transients. In order to compare the performances of these two observational strategies, we calculate expected discovery rates as a function of survey depth in five grizy filters and for different classes of supernovae (Ia, IIP, IIL, Ibc and IIn). We find that detections via magnification is the only effective strategy for relatively shallow pre-LSST surveys. For survey depths about the LSST capacity, both strategies yield comparable numbers of lensed supernovae. Supernova samples from the two methods are to a large extent independent and combining them increases detection rates by about 50 per cent. While the number of lensed supernovae detectable via magnification saturates at the limiting magnitudes of LSST, detection rates of multiply imaged supernova still go up drastically at increasing survey depth. Comparing potential discovery spaces, we find that lensed supernovae found via image multiplicity exhibit longer time delays and larger image separations making them more suitable for cosmological constraints than their counterparts found via magnification.   We find that the ZTF will find about 2 type Ia and 4 core-collapse lensed supernovae per year at a limiting magnitude of 20.6 in the r band. Applying a hybrid method which combines searching for highly magnified or multiply imaged transients, we find that LSST will detect 89 type Ia and 254 core-collapse lensed supernovae per year. In all cases, lensed core-collapsed supernovae will be dominated by type IIn supernovae contributing to 80 per cent of the total counts, although this prediction relies quite strongly on the adopted spectral templates for this class of supernovae. Revisiting the case of the lensed supernova iPTF16geu, we find that it is consistent within the 2\sigma contours of predicted redshifts and magnifications for the iPTF survey.
We discuss the prospects for detecting nu_{mu,tau} and nu_{tau}neutrinos from Type II supernovas using the novel detector at the Supernova Burst Observatory (SNBO) or OMNIS that is being designed for an underground laboratory in the USA. This detector would collect ~2000 flavor selected events from a Galactic supernova and could probe neutrino mass down to a few eV, as well as the dynamics of the supernova process. We believe this is essential to further our understanding of the neutrino section of elementary particle physics.
We describe the current situation concerning methods to search for relic neutrinos from the Big Bang and from all past supernovae (SNs). The most promising method for Big Bang neutrinos is by the interaction of ultra-high- energy (UHE) neutrinos. For supernova neutrinos, both Super Kamiokande- and ICARUS-type detectors will be important to study both nubar_{e} and nu_{e} fluxes. We also discuss a dedicated supernova burst observatory (OMNIS) being planned for three sites in the world. We also describe the possible analysis of the supernova type-II (SNII) neutrinos, including flavor mixing, that might be carried out in the future.
Adopting a single degenerate scenario for Type Ia supernova progenitors with the metallicity effect, we make a prediction of the cosmic supernova rate history as a composite of the supernova rates in spiral and elliptical galaxies, and compare with the recent observational data up to z ~ 0.55.
The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO) has unique capabilities as a supernova detector. In the event of a galactic supernova there are opportunities, with the data that SNO would collect, to constrain certain intrinsic neutrino properties significantly, to test details of the various models of supernova dynamics, and to provide prompt notification to the astronomical community through the Supernova Early Warning System (SNEWS). This paper consists of a discussion of these opportunities illustrated by some preliminary Monte Carlo results.
The thermalized energy from the radioactive decays of 56Ni and 57Ni and their daughter nuclides power the light curves of supernovae near maximum light. The bolometric light curve gives us a fundamental understanding of the energy evolution of a supernova explosion and the amount of radioactive nuclides produced. In this review, I will discuss the bolometric evolution of the Type IIp supernova SN1987A, and the general class of bolometric light curves of Type Ia thermonuclear explosions.
We propose to use the thermal X-ray emission from young supernova remnants (SNRs) originated in Type Ia supernovae (SNe) to extract relevant information concerning the explosion mechanism. We focus on the differences between numerical 1D and 3D explosion calculations, and the impact that these differences could have on young SNRs. We use the remnant of the Tycho supernova (SN 1572) as a test case to compare with our predictions, discussing the observational features that allow to accept or discard a given model.
Young supernova remnants that contain pulsar wind nebulae provide diagnostics for both the inner part of the supernova and the interaction with the surrounding medium, providing an opportunity to relate these objects to supernova types. Among observed young nebulae, there is evidence for a range of supernova types, including Type IIP (Crab Nebula and SN 1054) and Type IIb/IIn/IIL (G292.0+1.8).
We cross-correlate the sample of Type Ia supernovae from Riess et al. (2004) with the SDSS DR2 photometric galaxy catalogue. In contrast to recent work, we find no detectable correlation between supernova magnitude and galaxy overdensity on scales ranging between 1 and 10 arcminutes. Our results are in accord with theoretical expectations for gravitational lensing of supernovae by large-scale structure. Future supernova surveys like SNAP will be capable of detecting unambiguously the predicted lensing signal.
The pursuit of the core collapse supernova explosion mechanism continues. While such efforts have been undertaken over the last four decades, it is only in the last decade that multidimensional models have been developed, and only in the last few years that significant components of supernova models, such as the neutrino transport, have been modeled with sufficient realism. We can now identify what are arguably the important components that must be included in any realistic three-dimensional supernova model. The challenge we now face is to include all of these in the models.
We study 8 supernovae discovered as part of the International Time Programme (ITP) project ``Omega and Lambda from Supernovae and the Physics of Supernova Explosions'' at the European Northern Observatory (ENO). The goal of the project is to increase the sample of intermediate redshift (0.1<z<0.4) SNe Ia for testing properties of SNe Ia along z and for enlarging the sample in the Hubble diagram up to large z.
The use of Type Ia supernovae as cosmological tools has reinforced the need to better understand these objects and their light curves. The light curves of Type Ia supernovae are powered by the nuclear decay of $^{56}Ni \to ^{56}Co \to ^{56}Fe$. The late time light curves can provide insight into the behavior of the decay products and their effect of the shape of the curves. We present the optical light curves of six "normal" Type Ia supernovae, obtained at late times with template image subtraction, and the fits of these light curves to supernova energy deposition models.
Binary stars are important for a full understanding of stellar evolution. We present a summary of how predictions of the relative supernova rates varies between single and binary stars. We also show how the parameter space of different supernova types differs between single and binary stars. We then consider an important question of how to infer a supernova progenitor's properties from pre-explosion imaging and present rescent work of producing synthe tic colours for our stellar models to make a direct comparison with any detections or limits obtained on supernova progentiors from pre-explosion images.
This is a statistical study of the properties of type Ib/c and II supernovae and of the integral parameters of their spiral host galaxies. The methods of one-dimensional and multivariate statistics were applied to the data sample. It was found that the Ib/c supernovae are more concentrated radially toward the centers of the galaxies than those of type II. The distributions of the radial distances R(SN)/R(25) for the type Ib/c and II supernovae in active galaxies are more concentrated toward the center than in normal galaxies. This effect is stronger for type Ib/c than for type II supernovae.
We present a search for core-collapse supernovae in the Milky Way galaxy, using the MiniBooNE neutrino detector. No evidence is found for core-collapse supernovae occurring in our Galaxy in the period from December 14, 2004 to July 31, 2008, corresponding to 98% live-time for collection. We set a limit on the core-collapse supernova rate out to a distance of 13.5 kpc to be less than 0.69 supernovae per year at 90% CL.
We investigate effects of aspherical energy deposition in core-collapse supernovae on the light curve of the supernova shock breakout. We performed two-dimensional hydrodynamical calculations of an aspherical supernova explosion to obtain the time when a shock wave generated in the stellar interior reaches the stellar surface in each radial direction. Using results of the calculations, light curves during the shock breakout are derived in an approximate way. We show that the light curve during the shock breakout can be a strong indicator of aspherical properties of core-collapse supernovae.
We review the main observational and theoretical facts about acceleration of Galactic cosmic rays in supernova remnants, discussing the arguments in favor and against a connection between cosmic rays and supernova remnants, the so-called supernova remnant paradigm for the origin of Galactic cosmic rays. Recent developments in the modeling of the mechanism of diffusive shock acceleration are discussed, with emphasis on the role of 1) magnetic field amplification, 2) acceleration of nuclei heavier than hydrogen, 3) presence of neutrals in the circumstellar environment. The status of the supernova-cosmic ray connection in the time of Fermi-LAT and Cherenkov telescopes is also discussed.
We examine pre-supernova Chandra images to find X-ray luminosities of type Ia supernova progenitors. At present, we have one possible direct detection and upper limits for the X-ray luminosities of a number of other supernova progenitors. The method has also yielded a possible detection of a X-ray binary Wolf-Rayet system as the progenitor of a type Ib supernova.
We evaluate the current status of supernova remnants as the sources of Galactic cosmic rays. We summarize observations of supernova remnants, covering the whole electromagnetic spectrum and describe what these obser- vations tell us about the acceleration processes by high Mach number shock fronts. We discuss the shock modification by cosmic rays, the shape and maximum energy of the cosmic-ray spectrum and the total energy budget of cosmic rays in and surrounding supernova remnants. Additionally, we discuss problems with supernova remnants as main sources of Galactic cosmic rays, as well as alternative sources.
Supernovae are the dominant source of stellar feedback, which plays an important role in regulating galaxy formation and evolution. While this feedback process is still quite uncertain, it is probably not due to individual supernova remnants as commonly observed. Most supernovae likely take place in low-density, hot gaseous environments, such as superbubbles and galactic bulges, and typically produce no long-lasting bright remnants. I review recent observational and theoretical work on the impact of such supernovae on galaxy ecosystems, particularly on hot gas in superbubbles and galactic spheroids.
The discovery of many objects with unprecedented, amazing observational characteristics caused the last decade to be the most prolific period for the supernova research. Many of these new supernovae are transitional objects between existing classes, others well enter within the defined classes, but still show unique properties. This makes the traditional classification scheme inadequate to take into account the overall SN variety and, consequently, requires the introduction of new subclasses.
The development of observational techniques has inriched our knowledge of supernova remnants. In this paper, we review the main progresses in the last decade, including new discoveries of supernova remnants and the associated (rare type of) pulsars, nucleosynthesis, the interaction between supernova remnants and molecular clouds, dust in the supernova remnants, shock physics, and cosmic ray accelerations.
A simple inhomogeneous cosmological model with a local void is constrained with the latest Union supernova compilation. To fit the supernova data, a large local void on the scales of 1 Gpc is found, contrary to the small scales of 200 Mpc in the previous finding. A more realistic inhomogeneous cosmological model may be required to fit the supernova data. Alternatively, a clumpy universe with clumpiness parameter < 1 can fit the supernova data with reduced local void scales.
It is shown that high-energy astrophysical neutrinos observed in the IceCube experiment can be produced by protons accelerated in extragalactic Type IIn supernova remnants by shocks propagating in the dense circumstellar medium. The nonlinear diffusive shock acceleration model is used for description of particle acceleration. We calculate the neutrino spectrum produced by an individual Type IIn supernova and the spectrum of neutrino background produced by IIn supernovae in the expanding Universe. We also found that the arrival direction of one Icecube neutrino candidate (track event 47) is at 1.35$^{\circ }$ from Type IIn supernova 2005bx.
Supernovae have long been proposed to be efficient dust producers in galaxies. Observations in the mid-infrared indicate that dust forms a few hundred days after the stellar explosion. Yet, the chemical type and the amount of dust produced by supernovae are not well quantified. In this review, we summarise our current knowledge of dust formation derived from observations of supernovae, present the various theoretical models on dust synthesis and their predictions, and discuss these results in the context of the most recent observations of dust in supernova remnants.
A future core-collapse supernova in our Galaxy will be detected by several neutrino detectors around the world. The neutrinos escape from the supernova core over several seconds from the time of collapse, unlike the electromagnetic radiation, emitted from the envelope, which is delayed by a time of order hours. In addition, the electromagnetic radiation can be obscured by dust in the intervening interstellar space. The question therefore arises whether a supernova can be located by its neutrinos alone. The early warning of a supernova and its location might allow greatly improved astronomical observations. The theme of the present work is a careful and realistic assessment of this question, taking into account the statistical significance of the various neutrino signals. Not surprisingly, neutrino-electron forward scattering leads to a good determination of the supernova direction, even in the presence of the large and nearly isotropic background from other reactions. Even with the most pessimistic background assumptions, SuperKamiokande (SK) and the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO) can restrict the supernova direction to be within circles of radius $5^\circ$ and $20^\circ$, respectively. Other reactions with more events but weaker angular dependence are much less useful for locating the supernova. Finally, there is the oft-discussed possibility of triangulation, i.e., determination of the supernova direction based on an arrival time delay between different detectors. Given the expected statistics we show that, contrary to previous estimates, this technique does not allow a good determination of the supernova direction.
The supernova SN2001du in the galaxy NGC1365 (19+/-2Mpc), is a core-collapse event of type II-P. Images of this galaxy, have been taken with HST approximately 6.6 years before discovery and include the supernova position on the WFPC2 field of view. We have observed the supernova with the WFPC2 to allow accurate differential astrometry of SN2001du on the pre-explosion frames. There is a marginal detection (3-sigma) of a source close to the supernova position on the prediscovery V-band frame, however it is not precisely coincident and we do not believe it to be a robust detection of a point source. We conclude that there is no stellar progenitor at the supernova position and derive sensitivity limits of the prediscovery images which provide an upper mass limit for the progenitor star. We estimate that the progenitor had a mass of less than 15M_sol. We revisit two other nearby SNe II-P which have high quality pre-explosion images, and refine the upper mass limits for the progenitor stars. Finally we compile all the direct information available for the progenitors of eight nearby core-collapse supernovae and compare their mass estimates. These are compared with the latest stellar evolutionary models of pre-supernova evolution which have attempted to relate metallicity and mass to the supernovae type. Reasonable agreement is found for the lower mass events (generally the II-P), but some discrepancies appear at higher masses. (abridged).
I review the status and perspectives of the research on the diffuse flux of (core collapse) supernova neutrinos (DF). In absence of a positive signal, several upper bounds exist in different detection channels. Of these, the strongest is the limit from SuperKamiokande (SK) of 1.2 electron antineutrinos cm^-2 s^-1 at 90% confidence level above 19.3 MeV of neutrino energy. The predictions of the DF depend on the cosmological rate of supernovae and on the neutrino emission in a individual supernova (spectrum, luminosity,..). Above the SK threshold, they range between 0.05 electron antineutrinos cm^-2 s^-1 up to touching the SK limit. The SK upper bound constrains part of the parameter space of the supernova rate - and indirectly of the star formation rate - only in models with relatively hard neutrino spectra, while predictions with softer spectra would need bounds stronger by about a factor of 4 to be tested. Experimentally, a feasible and very important goal for the future is the improvement of background discrimination and the resulting lowering of the detection threshold. Theory instead will benefit from reducing the uncertainties on the supernova neutrino emission (either with more precise numerical modeling or with data from a galactic supernova) and on the supernova rate. The latter will be provided precisely by next generation supernova surveys up to a normalization factor. Therefore, the detection of the DF is likely to be precious chiefly to constrain such normalization and to study the physics of neutrino emission in supernovae.
Core collapse supernovae are a huge source of all flavor neutrinos. The flavor composition, energy spectrum and time structure of the neutrino burst from a galactic supernova can provide information about the explosion mechanism and the mechanisms of proto neutron star cooling. Such data can also give information about the intrinsic properties of the neutrino such as flavor oscillations. One important question is to understand to which extend can the supernova and the neutrino physics be decoupled in the observation of a single supernova. In this paper we discuss the possibility to probe the neutrino mixing angle \th13 and the type of mass hierarchy from the detection of supernova neutrinos with a liquid argon TPC detector. Moreover, describing the supernova neutrino emission by a set of five parameters (average energy of the different neutrino flavors, their relative luminosity and the total supernova binding energy), we quantitatively study how it is possible to constrain these parameters. A characteristic feature of the liquid argon TPC is the accessibility to four independent detection channels ((1) elastic scattering off electrons, (2) charged neutrino and (3) antineutrino and (4) neutral currents on argon nuclei) which have different sensitivities to electron-neutrino, anti-electron-neutrino and other neutrino flavors (muon and tau (anti)neutrinos). This allows to over-constrain the five supernova and the flavor mixing parameters and to some extent disentangle neutrino from supernova physics.
Aim: We present new extraction and identification techniques for supernova (SN) spectra developed within the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS) collaboration.   Method: The new spectral extraction method takes full advantage of photometric information from the Canada-France-Hawai telescope (CFHT) discovery and reference images by tracing the exact position of the supernova and the host signals on the spectrogram. When present, the host spatial profile is measured on deep multi-band reference images and is used to model the host contribution to the full (supernova + host) signal. The supernova is modelled as a Gaussian function of width equal to the seeing. A chi-square minimisation provides the flux of each component in each pixel of the 2D spectrogram. For a host-supernova separation greater than <~ 1 pixel, the two components are recovered separately and we do not use a spectral template in contrast to more standard analyses. This new procedure permits a clean extraction of the supernova separately from the host in about 70% of the 3rd year ESO/VLT spectra of the SNLS. A new supernova identification method is also proposed. It uses the SALT2 spectrophotometric template to combine the photometric and spectral data. A galaxy template is allowed for spectra for which a separate extraction of the supernova and the host was not possible.   Result: These new techniques have been tested against more standard extraction and identification procedures. They permit a secure type and redshift determination in about 80% of cases. The present paper illustrates their performances on a few sample spectra.
SN 2007bi is an extremely luminous Type Ic supernova. This supernova is thought to be evolved from a very massive star, and two possibilities have been proposed for the explosion mechanism. One possibility is a pair-instability supernova with an M_{CO} ~ 100 M_sun CO core progenitor. Another possibility is a core-collapse supernova with M_{CO} ~ 40 M_sun. We investigate the evolution of very massive stars with main-sequence mass M_{MS} = 100 - 500 M_sun and Z_0 = 0.004, which is in the metallicity range of the host galaxy of SN 2007bi, to constrain the progenitor of SN 2007bi. The supernova type relating to the surface He abundance is also discussed. The main-sequence mass of the progenitor exploding as a pair-instability supernova could be M_{MS} ~ 515 - 575 M_sun. The minimum main-sequence mass could be 310 M_sun when uncertainties in the mass-loss rate are considered. A star with M_{MS} ~ 110 - 280 M_sun evolves to a CO star, appropriate for the core-collapse supernova of SN 2007bi. Arguments based on the probability of pair-instability and core-collapse supernovae favour the hypothesis that SN 2007bi originated from a core-collapse supernova event.
Supernova remnants are beautiful astronomical objects that are also of high scientific interest, because they provide insights into supernova explosion mechanisms, and because they are the likely sources of Galactic cosmic rays. X-ray observations are an important means to study these objects.And in particular the advances made in X-ray imaging spectroscopy over the last two decades has greatly increased our knowledge about supernova remnants. It has made it possible to map the products of fresh nucleosynthesis, and resulted in the identification of regions near shock fronts that emit X-ray synchrotron radiation.   In this text all the relevant aspects of X-ray emission from supernova remnants are reviewed and put into the context of supernova explosion properties and the physics and evolution of supernova remnants. The first half of this review has a more tutorial style and discusses the basics of supernova remnant physics and thermal and non-thermal X-ray emission. The second half offers a review of the recent advances.The topics addressed there are core collapse and thermonuclear supernova remnants, SN 1987A, mature supernova remnants, mixed-morphology remnants, including a discussion of the recent finding of overionization in some of them, and finally X-ray synchrotron radiation and its consequences for particle acceleration and magnetic fields.
Context. Molecular clouds are known to be turbulent and strongly affected by stellar feedback. Moreover, stellar feedback is believed to drive turbulence at large scales in galaxies.   Aims. We study the role played by supernovae in molecular clouds and the influence of the magnetic field on this process.   Methods. We performed three-dimensional numerical simulations of supernova explosions, in and near turbulent self-gravitating molecular clouds. In order to study the influence of the magnetic field, we performed both hydrodynamical and magnetohydrodynamical simulations. We also ran a series of simple uniform density medium simulations and developed a simple analytical model.   Results. We find that the total amount of momentum that is delivered during supernova explosions typically varies by a factor of about 2, even when the gas density changes by 3 orders of magnitude. However, the amount of momentum delivered to the dense gas varies by almost a factor of 10 if the supernova explodes within or outside the molecular cloud. The magnetic field has little influence on the total amount of momentum injected by the supernova explosions but increases the momentum injected into the dense gas.   Conclusions. Supernovae that explode inside molecular clouds remove a significant fraction of the cloud mass. Supernovae that explode outside have a limited influence on the cloud. It is thus essential to know sufficiently well the correlation between supernovae and the surrounding dense material in order to know whether supernovae can regulate star formation effectively.
Aims. We present and analyse late-time observations of the type-Ib supernova with possible pre-supernova progenitor detection, iPTF13bvn, taken at $\sim$300 days after the explosion, and discuss these in the context of constraints on the supernova's progenitor. Previous studies have proposed two possible natures for the progenitor of the supernova, i.e. a massive Wolf-Rayet star or a lower-mass star in close binary system. Methods. Our observations show that the supernova has entered the nebular phase, with the spectrum dominated by Mg~I]$\lambda\lambda$4571, [O~I]$\lambda\lambda$6300, 6364, and [Ca~II]$\lambda\lambda$7291, 7324 emission lines. We measured the emission line fluxes to estimate the core oxygen mass and compare the [O~I]/[Ca~II] line ratio with other supernovae. Results. The core oxygen mass of the supernova progenitor was estimated to be $\lesssim$0.7 M$_\odot$, which implies initial progenitor mass not exceeding $\sim$15 -- 17 M$_\odot$. Since the derived mass is too small for a single star to become a Wolf-Rayet star, this result lends more support to the binary nature of the progenitor star of iPTF13bvn. The comparison of [O~I]/[Ca~II] line ratio with other supernovae also shows that iPTF13bvn appears to be in close association with the lower-mass progenitors of stripped-envelope and type-II supernovae.
The emission of supernova remnants reflects the properties of both the progenitor supernovae and the surrounding environment. The complex morphology of the remnants, however, hampers the disentanglement of the two contributions. Here we aim at identifying the imprint of SN 1987A on the X-ray emission of its remnant and at constraining the structure of the environment surrounding the supernova. We performed high-resolution hydrodynamic simulations describing SN 1987A soon after the core-collapse and the following three-dimensional expansion of its remnant between days 1 and 15000 after the supernova. We demonstrated that the physical model reproducing the main observables of SN 1987A during the first 250 days of evolution reproduces also the X-ray emission of the subsequent expanding remnant, thus bridging the gap between supernovae and supernova remnants. By comparing model results with observations, we constrained the explosion energy in the range $1.2-1.4\times 10^{51}$~erg and the envelope mass in the range $15-17 M_{\odot}$. We found that the shape of X-ray lightcurves and spectra at early epochs (<15 years) reflects the structure of outer ejecta: our model reproduces the observations if the outermost ejecta have a post-explosion radial profile of density approximated by a power law with index $\alpha = -8$. At later epochs, the shapes of X-ray lightcurves and spectra reflect the density structure of the nebula around SN 1987A. This enabled us to ascertain the origin of the multi-thermal X-ray emission, to disentangle the imprint of the supernova on the remnant emission from the effects of the remnant interaction with the environment, and to constrain the pre-supernova structure of the nebula.
When a massive star in a binary system explodes as a supernova its companion star may be polluted with heavy elements from the supernova ejecta. Such a pollution had been detected in a handful of post-supernova binaries (Gonzalez Hernandez et al. 2011), but none of them is associated with a supernova remnant. We report the discovery of a solar-type star in a close, eccentric binary system with a neutron star within the young Galactic supernova remnant RCW 86. Our discovery implies that the supernova progenitor was a moving star, which exploded near the edge of its wind bubble and lost most of its initial mass due to common-envelope evolution shortly before core collapse. We find that the solar-type star is strongly polluted with calcium and other elements, which places the explosion within the class of calcium-rich supernovae -- faint and fast transients (Filippenko et al. 2003; Kasliwal et al. 2012}, whose origin is strongly debated (Kawabata et al. 2010; Waldman et al. 2011), and provides the first observational evidence that supernovae of this type can arise from core-collapse explosions (Kawabata et al. 2010; Moriya et al. 2010).
What exactly controls star formation in the Galaxy remains controversial. In particular, the role of feedback and magnetic field are still partially understood. We investigate the role played by supernovae feedback and magnetic field onto the star formation and the structure of the Galactic disk. We perform numerical simulations of the turbulent, magnetized, self-gravitating, multi-phase, supernovae regulated ISM within a 1 kpc stratified box. We implemented various schemes for the supernovae. This goes from a random distribution at a fixed rate to distributions for which the supernovae are spatially and temporally correlated to the formation of stars. To study the influence of magnetic field on star formation, we perform both hydrodynamical and magneto-hydrodynamical simulations. We find that supernovae feedback has a drastic influence on the galactic evolution. The supernovae distribution is playing a very significant role. When the supernovae are not correlated with star formation events, they do not modify significantly the very high star formation rate obtained without feedback. When the supernovae follow the accretion, the star formation rate can be reduced by a factor up to 30. Magnetic field is also playing a significant role. It reduces the star formation rate by a factor up to 2-3 and reduces the number of collapse sites by a factor of about 2. The exact correlation between the supernovae and the dense gas appears to have significant consequences on the galactic disk evolution and the star formation. This implies that small scale studies are necessary to understand and quantify the feedback efficiency. Magnetic field does influence the star formation at galactic scales by reducing the star formation rate and the number of star formation sites.
Supernova (SN) explosions play an important role in the development of galactic structures. The energy and momentum imparted on the interstellar medium (ISM) in so-called "supernova feedback" drives turbulence, heats the gas, enriches it with heavy elements, can lead to the formation of new stars or even suppress star formation by disrupting stellar nurseries. In the numerical simulation at the sub-galactic level, not including the energy and momentum of supernovas in the physical description of the problem can also lead to several problems that might partially be resolved by including a description of supernovas. In this thesis such an implementation is attempted for the combined numerical hydrodynamics and N-body simulation software Arepo (Springel, 2010) for the high density gas in the ISM only. This allows supernova driven turbulence in boxes of 400pc cubed to be studied. In a stochastic process a large amount of thermal energy is imparted on a number of neighbouring cells, mimicking the effect of a supernova explosions. We test this approach by modelling the explosion of a single supernova in a uniform density medium and comparing the evolution of the resulting supernova remnant to the theoretically-predicted behaviour. We also run a simulation with our feedback code and a fixed supernova rate derived from the Kennicutt-Schmidt relation (Kennicutt, 1998) for a duration of about 20 Myrs. We describe our method in detail in this text and discuss the properties of our implementation. vii
The colour evolution of reddened Type Ia supernovae can place strong constraints on the location of dust and help address the question of whether the observed extinction stems from the interstellar medium or from circumstellar material surrounding the progenitor. Here we analyse BV photometry of 48 reddened Type Ia supernovae from the literature and estimate the dust location from their $B-V$ colour evolution. We find a time-variable colour excess $E(B-V)$ for 15 supernovae in our sample and constrain dust to distances between 0.013 and 45 pc ($4\times10^{16}-10^{20}$ cm). For the remaining supernovae, we obtain a constant $E(B-V)$ evolution and place lower limits on the dust distance from the explosion. In all the 48 supernovae, the inferred dust location is compatible with an interstellar origin for the extinction. This is corroborated by the observation that supernovae with relatively nearby dust ($\lesssim$ 1 pc) are located close to the center of their host galaxy, in high-density dusty regions where interactions between the supernova radiation and interstellar clouds close by are likely to occur. For supernovae showing time-variable $E(B-V)$, we identify a potential preference for low $R_\mathrm{V}$ values, unusually strong sodium absorption and blue-shifted and time-variable absorption features. Within the interstellar framework, this brings evidence to a proposed scenario where cloud-cloud collisions induced by the supernova radiation pressure can shift the grain size distribution to smaller values and enhance the abundance of sodium in the gaseous phase.
We use the results of a supernova light-curve population synthesis to predict the range of possible supernova light curves arising from a population of single-star progenitors that lead to type IIP supernovae. We calculate multiple models varying the initial mass, explosion energy, nickel mass and nickel mixing and then compare these to type IIP supernovae with detailed light curve data and pre-explosion imaging progenitor constraints. Where a good fit is obtained to observations, we are able to achieve initial progenitor and nickel mass estimates from the supernova lightcurve that are comparable in precision to those obtained from progenitor imaging. For two of the eleven IIP supernovae considered our fits are poor, indicating that more progenitor models should be included in our synthesis or that our assumptions, regarding factors such as stellar mass loss rates or the rapid final stages of stellar evolution, may need to be revisited in certain cases. Using the results of our analysis we are able to show that most of the type IIP supernovae have an explosion energy of the order of log(E_exp/ergs)=50.52+/-0.10 and that both the amount of nickel in the supernovae and the amount of mixing may have a dependence on initial progenitor mass.
A core-collapse supernova releases the vast majority of the gravitational binding energy of its compact remnant in the form of neutrinos over an interval of a few tens of seconds. In the event of a core-collapse supernova within our galaxy, multiple current and future neutrino detectors would see a large burst in activity. Neutrinos escape a supernova hours before light does, so any prompt information about the supernova's direction that can be inferred via the neutrino signal will help to enable early electromagnetic observations of the supernova. While there are methods to determine the direction via intrinsic directionality of some neutrino-matter interaction channels, a complementary method which will reach maturity with the next generation of large neutrino detectors is the use of relative neutrino arrival times at different detectors around the globe. To evaluate this triangulation method for realistic detector configurations of the next few decades, we generate random supernova neutrino signals with realistic detector assumptions, and quantify the error in expected time delay between detections. We investigate a practical and robust method of estimating the time differences between burst detections, also correcting for detection efficiency bias. With this method, we determine the pointing precision of supernova neutrino triangulation as a function of supernova distance and location, detectors used, detector background level and neutrino mass ordering assumption. Under favorable conditions, the 1$\sigma$ supernova search area from triangulation could be reduced to a few percent of the sky. It should be possible to implement this method with low latency under realistic conditions.
We use a sample of 42 supernovae detected with the Advanced Camera for Surveys on-board the Hubble Space Telescope as part of the Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey to measure the rate of core collapse supernovae to z~0.7 and type Ia supernovae to z~1.6. This significantly increases the redshift range where supernova rates have been estimated from observations.   The rate of core collapse supernovae can be used as an independent probe of the cosmic star formation rate. Based on the observations of 17 core collapse supernovae, we measure an increase in the core collapse supernova rate by a factor of 1.6 in the range 0.3<z<0.7, and an overall increase by a factor of 7 to z~0.7 in comparison to the local core collapse supernova rate. The increase in the rate in this redshift range in consistent with recent measurements of the star formation rate derived from UV-luminosity densities and IR datasets.   Based on 25 type Ia supernovae, we find a SN Ia rate that is a factor 3-5 higher at z~1 compared to earlier estimates at lower redshifts (z<0.5), implying that the type Ia supernova rate traces a higher star formation rate at redshifts z>1 compared to low redshift. At higher redshift (z>1), we find a suggested decrease in the type Ia rate with redshift. This evolution of the Ia rate with redshift is consistent with a type Ia progenitor model where there is a substantial delay between the formation of the progenitor star and the explosion of the supernova. Assuming that the type Ia progenitor stars have initial main sequence masses 3-8 M_Sun, we find that 5-7% of the available progenitors explode as type Ia supernovae.
Long-duration gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are associated with type Ic supernovae that are more luminous than average and that eject material at very high velocities. Less-luminous supernovae were not hitherto known to be associated with GRBs, and therefore GRB-supernovae were thought to be rare events. Whether X-ray flashes - analogues of GRBs, but with lower luminosities and fewer gamma-rays - can also be associated with supernovae, and whether they are intrinsically 'weak' events or typical GRBs viewed off the axis of the burst, is unclear. Here we report the optical discovery and follow-up observations of the type Ic supernova SN 2006aj associated with X-ray flash XRF 060218. Supernova 2006aj is intrinsically less luminous than the GRB-supernovae, but more luminous than many supernovae not accompanied by a GRB. The ejecta velocities derived from our spectra are intermediate between these two groups, which is consistent with the weakness of both the GRB output and the supernova radio flux. Our data, combined with radio and X-ray observations, suggest that XRF 060218 is an intrinsically weak and soft event, rather than a classical GRB observed off-axis. This extends the GRB-supernova connection to X-ray flashes and fainter supernovae, implying a common origin. Events such as XRF 060218 are probably more numerous than GRB-supernovae.
The hot Intra-Cluster Medium (ICM) in clusters of galaxies is a very large repository of metals produced by supernovae. We aim to accurately measure the abundances in the ICM of many clusters and compare these data with metal yields produced by supernovae. Using the data archive of the XMM-Newton X-ray observatory, we compile a sample of 22 clusters. We fit spectra extracted from the core regions and determine the abundances of silicon, sulfur, argon, alcium, iron, and nickel. The abundances from the spectral fits are subsequently fitted to supernova yields determined from several supernova type Ia and core-collapse supernova models. We find that the argon and calcium abundances cannot be fitted with currently favoured supernova type Ia models. We obtain a major improvement of the fit, when we use an empirically modified delayed-detonation model that is calibrated on the Tycho supernova remnant. The two modified parameters are the density where the sound wave in the supernova turns into a shock and the ratio of the specific internal energies of ions and electrons at the shock. Our fits also suggest that the core-collapse supernovae that contributed to the enrichment of the ICM had progenitors which were already enriched. The Ar/Ca ratio in clusters is a good touchstone for determining the quality of type Ia models. The core-collapse contribution, which is about 50% and not strongly dependent on the IMF or progenitor metallicity, does not have a significant impact on the Ar/Ca ratio. The number ratio between supernova type Ia and core-collapse supernovae suggests that binary systems in the appropriate mass range are very efficient (~ 5-16%) in eventually forming supernova type Ia explosions.
We present supernova rate measurements at redshift 0.1-1.0 from the Stockholm VIMOS Supernova Survey (SVISS). The sample contains 16 supernovae in total. The discovered supernovae have been classified as core collapse or type Ia supernovae (9 and 7, respectively) based on their light curves, colour evolution and host galaxy photometric redshift. The rates we find for the core collapse supernovae are 3.29 (-1.78,-1.45)(+3.08,+1.98) x 10^-4 yr^-1 Mpc^-3 h70^3 (with statistical and systematic errors respectively) at average redshift 0.39 and 6.40 (-3.12,-2.11)(+5.30,+3.65) x 10^-4 yr^-1 Mpc^-3 h70^3 at average redshift 0.73. For the type Ia supernovae we find a rate of 1.29 (-0.57,-0.28)(+0.88,+0.27) x 10^-4 yr^-1 Mpc^-3 h70^3 at average redshift 0.62. All of these rate estimates have been corrected for host galaxy extinction, using a method that includes supernovae missed in infrared bright galaxies at high redshift. We use Monte Carlo simulations to make a thorough study of the systematic effects from assumptions made when calculating the rates and find that the most important errors come from misclassification, the assumed mix of faint and bright supernova types and uncertainties in the extinction correction. We compare our rates to other observations and to the predicted rates for core collapse and type Ia supernovae based on the star formation history and different models of the delay time distribution. Overall, our measurements, when taking the effects of extinction into account, agree quite well with the predictions and earlier results. Our results highlight the importance of understanding the role of systematic effects, and dust extinction in particular, when trying to estimate the rates of supernovae at moderate to high redshift.
We present the first measurement of the rate of Type Ia supernovae at high redshift. The result is derived using a large subset of data from the Supernova Cosmology Project as described in more detail at this meeting by Perlmutter et al. (1996). We present our methods for estimating the numbers of galaxies and the number of solar luminosities to which the survey is sensitive, the supernova detection efficiency and hence the control time. We derive a rest-frame Type Ia supernova rate at z~0.4 of 0.82^+0.54_-0.37 ^+0.42_-0.32 h^2 SNu where the first uncertainty is statistical and the second includes systematic effects.
Nearby supernova explosions may cause geological isotope anomalies via the direct deposition of debris or by cosmic-ray spallation in the earth's atmosphere. We estimate the mass of material deposited terrestrially by these two mechanisms, showing the dependence on the supernova distance. A number of radioactive isotopes are identified as possible diagnostic tools, such as Be-10, Al-26, Cl-36, Mn-53, Fe-60, and Ni-59, as well as the longer-lived I-129, Sm-146, and Pu-244. We discuss whether the 35 and 60 kyr-old Be-10 anomalies observed in the Vostok antarctic ice cores could be due to supernova explosions. Combining our estimates for matter deposition with results of recent nucleosynthesis yields, we calculate the expected signal from nearby supernovae using ice cores back to $\sim 300$ kyr ago, and we discuss using deep ocean sediments back to several hundred Myr. In particular, we examine the prospects for identifying isotope anomalies due to the Geminga supernova explosion, and signatures of the possibility that supernovae might have caused one or more biological mass extinctions.
We use different assumptions for the combination of dust extinction and star formation up to redshifts z >= 5, as well as detailed modeling of supernova properties, to estimate the number of supernovae that should be observable with various instruments, in particular the NGST. In the model we use realistic light curves and spectral shapes that evolve with time for the different types supernovae.   We find that the NGST should be able to detect several tens of core collapse SNe in a single detection if the observational limit in the range 1-5 microns is 1 nJy and the field is 16 sq. arcmin. We also estimate the observable number of Type Ia supernovae. Due to the time delay between the formation of the progenitor star and the explosion of the supernova, there are additional aspects that have to be considered when interpreting observational rates of these supernovae.
We use a rigorous method, based on Bayesian inference, for calculating the odds favoring the hypothesis that any particular class of astronomical transients produce gamma-ray bursts over the hypothesis that they do not. We then apply this method to a sample of 83 Type Ia supernovae and a sample of 20 Type Ib-Ic supernovae. We find overwhelming odds against the hypothesis that all Type Ia supernovae produce gamma-ray bursts, whether at low redshift ($10^{9}:1$) or high-redshift ($10^{12}:1$), and very large odds ($6000:1$) against the hypothesis that all Type Ib, Ib/c, and Ic supernovae produce observable gamma-ray bursts. We find large odds ($34:1$) against the hypothesis that a fraction of Type Ia supernovae produce observable gamma-ray bursts, and moderate odds ($6:1$) against the hypothesis that a fraction of Type Ib-Ic supernovae produce observable bursts.
Type Ia Supernovae are in many aspects still enigmatic objects. Recent years have witnessed a bonanza of supernova observations. The increased samples from dedicated searches have allowed the statistical investigation of Type Ia Supernovae as a class. The observational data on Type Ia Supernovae are very rich, and the uniform picture of a decade ago has been replaced by several correlations which connect the maximum luminosity with light curve shape, color evolution, spectral appearance, and host galaxy morphology. These correlations hold across almost the complete spectrum of Type Ia Supernovae, with a number of notable exceptions. After 150 days past maximum, however, all observed objects show the same decline rate and spectrum. Bolometric light curves are a handy tool to investigate the overall appearance of Type Ia Supernovae. The nickel masses derived this way show large variations, which combined with the dynamics from line widths, indicate that the brighter events are also coming from more massive objects. The lack of accurate distances and the uncertainty in the correction for absorption are hampering further progress. Improvements in these areas are vital for the detailed comparison of luminosities and the determination of nickel masses.
We present preliminary results of a follow-up survey which aims to characterise in detail those galaxies which hosted Type Ia supernovae found by the Supernova Cosmology Project (SCP). Our survey has two components: Hubble Space Telescope imaging with STIS and Keck spectroscopy with ESI, the goal being to classify each host galaxy into one of three broad morphological/spectral classes and hence to investigate the dependence of supernovae properties on host galaxy type over a large range in redshift. Of particular interest is the supernova Hubble diagram characterised by host galaxy class which suggests that most of the scatter arises from those occurring in late-type irregulars. Supernovae hosted by (presumed dust-free) E/S0 galaxies closely follow the adopted SCP cosmological model. Although larger datasets are required, we cannot yet find any significant difference in the light curves of distant supernovae hosted in different galaxy types.
Supernova (SN) 1998bw and gamma-ray burst (GRB) 980425 offer the first direct evidence that supernovae are the progenitors of some GRBs. However, this burst was unusually dim, smooth and soft compared to other bursts with known afterglows. Whether it should be considered a prototype for cosmological GRBs depends largely on whether the supernova explosion and burst were asymmetrical or can be modeled as spherical. We address this question by treating the acceleration of the supernova shock in the outermost layers of the stellar envelope, the transition to relativistic flow, and the subsequent expansion (and further acceleration) of the ejecta into the surrounding medium. We find that GRB 980425 could plausibly have been produced by a collision between the relativistic ejecta from SN 1998bw and the star's pre-supernova wind; the model requires no significant asymmetry. This event therefore belongs to a dim subclass of GRBs and is not a prototype for jet-like cosmological GRBs.
Stars in the mass range 8 Msun<M<30 Msun are thought to end their lives as luminous supernovae that leave behind a neutron star. However, if a substantial fraction of these stars instead ended as black-hole remnants, without producing a supernova (a `failed' supernova), how would one know? We show that, under plausible assumptions, the Hipparcos catalog should contain about 30 f_{fail} astrometric binaries with black-hole companions, where f_{fail} is the fraction of supernovae that fail. Since no black-hole astrometric binaries are found in Hipparcos, one might like to conclude that such failed supernovae are very rare. However, the most important assumption required for this argument, the initial companion mass function (ICMF) of G stars (the majority of Hipparcos stars) in the high-mass companion regime, is without any observational basis. We show how the ICMF of G stars can be measured using the Full-Sky Astrometric Explorer (FAME), thereby permitting an accurate measurement of the rate of supernovae that fail.
The Asiago Supernova Catalog is used to carry out a comparative study of supernova absolute-magnitude distributions. An overview of the absolute magnitudes of the supernovae in the current observational sample is presented, and the evidence for subluminous and overluminous events is examined. The fraction of supernovae that are underluminous (M_B > -15) appears to be higher (perhaps much higher) than one fifth but it remains very uncertain. The fraction that are overluminous (M_B < -20) is lower (probably much lower) than 0.01. The absolute-magnitude distributions for each supernova type, restricted to events within 1 Gpc, are compared. Although these distributions are affected by observational bias in favor of the more luminous events, they are useful for comparative studies. We find mean absolute blue magnitudes (for H_0=60) of -19.46 for normal Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia), -18.04 for SNe Ibc, -17.61 and -20.26 for normal and bright SNe Ibc considered separately, -18.03 for SNe II-L, -17.56 and -19.27 for normal and bright SNe II-L considered separately, -17.00 for SNe II-P, and -19.15 for SNe IIn.
The evidence for positive cosmological constant $\Lambda$ from Type Ia supernovae is reexamined.   Both high redshift supernova teams are found to underestimate the effects of host galaxy extinction. The evidence for an absolute magnitude- decay time relation is much weakened if supernovae not observed before maximum light are excluded. Inclusion of such objects artificially supresses the scatter about the mean relation.   With a consistent treatment of host galaxy extinction and elimination of supernovae not observed before maximum, the evidence for a positive lambda is not very significant (3-4 $\sigma$). A factor which may contribute to apparent faintness of high z supernovae is evolution of the host galaxy extinction with z.   The Hubble diagram using all high z distance estimates, including SZ clusters and gravitational lens time-delay estimates, does not appear inconsistent with an $\Omega_o$ = 1 model.   Although a positive $\Lambda$ can provide an, albeit physically unmotivated, resolution of the low curvature implied by CMB experiments and evidence that $\Omega_o <$ 1 from large-scale structure, the direct evidence from Type Ia supernovae seems at present to be inconclusive.
The Crab Nebula is likely to be expanding into freely expanding supernova ejecta, although the energy in the ejecta may be less than is typical for a Type II supernova. Pulsar nebulae much younger than the Crab have not been found and could have different properties. The search for such nebulae through ultraviolet/optical line emission in core collapse supernovae, or through their X-ray emission (which could show strong absorption) is warranted. Neutron stars have now been found in many young supernova remnants. There is not a clear link between neutron star and remnant type, although there is an indication that normal pulsars avoid the O-rich remnants. In the later phases of a supernova remnant, the pulsar wind nebula is crushed by the reverse shock front. Recent simulations show that this process is unstable, which can lead to mixing of the thermal and relativistic gases, and that the pulsar nebula is easily displaced from the pulsar, which can explain the position of the Vela pulsar relative to the Vela X radio nebula.
Supernova remnants are usually analysed in the light of hydrodynamical models of the interaction of supernova ejecta with either a constant density ambient medium or a circumstellar medium produced by a constant presupernova wind. However, the ejection of energetic wind during the presupernova phase changes the ambient medium structure and, consequently, the early supernova remnant evolution. We have analysed the evolution of young remnants of type Ia supernovae, focusing on the imprint of the presupernova wind history on the supernova remnant structure and on the influence of the explosion mechanism. We have found that the remnant evolution is most sensitive to the explosion mechanism at ages not larger than a few hundred years, while the presupernova history shows its influence at later epochs, before the Sedov phase sets in.
Supernovae release an enormous amount of energy into the interstellar medium. Their remnants can observationally be traced up to several ten-thousand years. So far more than 230 Galactic supernova remnants (SNRs) have been identified in the radio range. Detailed studies of the different types of SNRs give insight into the interaction of the blast wave with the interstellar medium. Shock accelerated particles are observed, but also neutron stars left from the supernova explosion make their contribution. X-ray observations in conjunction with radio data constrain models of supernova evolution.   A brief review of the origin and evolution of SNRs is given, which are compared with supernova statistics and observational limitations. In addition the morphology and characteristics of the different types of SNRs are described, including some recent results and illustrated by SNRs images mostly obtained with the Effelsberg 100-m telescope.
One promising method to test progenitor models for Type Ia supernovae is to identify surviving companion stars in historical supernova remnants. A surviving companion will have been strongly affected by its interaction with the supernova ejecta. Here we systematically explore the evolution and appearance of a typical companion star that has been stripped and heated by the supernova interaction during the post-impact re-equilibration phase. We show that, depending on the amount of heating and the amount of mass stripped by the impact or the previous binary mass transfer, such a star may be significantly overluminous or underluminous 10^3 - 10^4 yr after the supernova relative to its pre-supernova luminosity (by up to two orders of magnitude) and discuss the implications of these results for the strategies to be employed in searches for such companions.
The last ten years a number of observational advances have substantially increased our knowledge of shock phenomena in supernova remnants. This progress has mainly been made possible by the recent improvements in X-ray and Gamma-ray instrumentation. It has become clear that some shell-type supernova remnants, e.g. SN 1006, have X-ray emission dominated by synchrotron radiation, proving that electrons are accelerated up to 100 TeV. This is still an order of magnitude below 3E15 eV, at which energy the ion cosmic ray spectrum at earth shows a spectral break. So one of the major goals is to prove that supernova remnants are capable of accelerating ions at least up that energy.   Here I review the evidence that ions and electrons are accelerated up to energies ~100 TeV in supernova remnants, and, in addition, the recent progress that has been made in understanding the physics of collisionless shock fronts and the magnetic fields inside supernova remnants.
We give an overview of circumstellar interaction in young Type II supernovae, as seen through the eyes of very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) observations. The resolution attained by such observations (best than 1 mas) is a powerful tool to probe the interaction that takes place after a supernova goes off. The direct imaging of a supernova permits, in principle, to estimate the deceleration of its expansion, and to obtain information on the eject and circumstellar density profiles, as well as estimates of the magnetic field intensity and relativistic particle energy density in the supernova. Unfortunately, only a handful of radio supernovae are close and bright enough as to permit their study with VLBI. We present results from our high-resolution observations of the nearby Type II radio supernovae SN1986J and SN2001gd.
We present an update of our systematic analysis of all Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB) afterglow data, now published through the end of 2004, in an attempt to detect the predicted supernova light component. We fit the observed photometric light curves as the sum of an afterglow, an underlying host galaxy, and a supernova component. The latter is modeled using published UBVRI light curves of SN 1998bw as a template. The total sample of afterglows with established redshifts contains now 29 bursts (GRB 970228 - GRB 041006). For 13 of them a weak supernova excess (scaled to SN 1998bw) was found. In agreement with our earlier result (Zeh et al. 2004) we find that also in the updated sample all bursts with redshift < 0.7 show a supernova excess in their afterglow light curves. The general lack of a detection of a supernova component at larger redshifts can be explained with selection effects. These results strongly support our previous conclusion based on all afterglow data of the years 1997 to 2002 that in fact all afterglows of long-duration GRBs contain light from an associated supernova.
While existing detectors would see a burst of many neutrinos from a Milky Way supernova, the supernova rate is only a few per century. As an alternative, we propose the detection of ~ 1 neutrino per supernova from galaxies within 10 Mpc, in which there were at least 9 core-collapse supernovae since 2002. With a future 1-Mton scale detector, this could be a faster method for measuring the supernova neutrino spectrum, which is essential for calibrating numerical models and predicting the redshifted diffuse spectrum from distant supernovae. It would also allow a > 10^4 times more precise trigger time than optical data alone for high-energy neutrinos and gravitational waves.
We analyze the confining effect of cloud collapse on an expanding supernova shockfront. We solve the differential equation for the forces on the shockfront due to ram pressure, supernova energy, and gravity. We find that the expansion of the shockfront is slowed and in fact reversed by the collapsing cloud. Including radiative losses and a potential time lag between supernova explosion and cloud collapse shows that the expansion is reversed at smaller distances as compared to the non-radiative case. We also consider the case of multiple supernova explosions at the center of a collapsing cloud. For instance, if we scale our self-similar solution to a single supernova of energy 10^51 ergs occurring when a cloud of initial density 10^2 H/cm^3 has collapsed by 50%, we find that the shockfront is confined to ~15 pc in ~1 Myrs. Our calculations are pertinent to the observed unusually compact non-thermal radio emission in blue compact dwarf galaxies (BCDs). More generally, we demonstrate the potential of a collapsing cloud to confine supernovae, thereby explaining how dwarf galaxies would exist beyond their first generation of star formation.
Gravitational lensing of high-redshift supernovae is potentially an important source of uncertainty when deriving cosmological parameters from the measured brightness of Type Ia supernovae, especially in deep surveys with scarce statistics. Photometric and spectroscopic measurements of foreground galaxies along the lines-of-sight of 33 supernovae discovered with the Hubble Space Telescope, both core-collapse and Type Ia, are used to model the magnification probability distributions of the sources. Modelling galaxy halos with SIS or NFW-profiles and using M/L scaling laws provided by the Faber-Jackson and Tully-Fisher relations, we find clear evidence for supernovae with lensing (de)magnification. However, the magnification distribution of the Type Ia supernovae used to determine cosmological distances matches very well the expectations for an unbiased sample, i.e.their mean magnification factor is consistent with unity. Our results show that the lensing distortions of the supernova brightness can be well understood for the GOODS sample and that correcting for this effect has a negligible impact on the derived cosmological parameters.
Multi-dimensional simulations of the neutrino-driven mechanism behind core-collapse supernovae have long shown that the explosions from this mechanism would be asymmetric. Recently, detailed core-collapse simulations have shown that the explosion may be strongest in a single direction. We present a suite of simulations modeling these ``single-lobe'' supernova explosions of a 15 solar mass red supergiant star, focusing on the effect these asymmetries have on the gamma-ray emission and the mixing in the explosion. We discuss how asymmetries in the explosion mechanism might explain many of the observed ``asymmetries'' of supernovae, focusing on features of both supernova 1987A and the Cas A supernova remnant. In particular, we show that single-lobe explosions provide a promising solution to the redshifted iron lines of supernova 1987A. We also show that the extent of mixing for explosive burning products depends sensitively on the angular profile of the velocity asymmetry and can be much more extensive than previously assumed.
We identify a light echo candidate from Hubble Space Telescope (HST) imaging of NGC 2441, the host galaxy of the Type Ia supernova 1995E. From the echo's angular size and the estimated distance to the host galaxy, we find a distance of 207 +/- 35 pc between the dust and the site of the supernova. If confirmed, this echo brings the total number of observed non-historical Type Ia light echoes to three -- the others being SN 1991T and SN 1998bu -- suggesting they are not uncommon. We compare the properties of the known Type Ia supernova echoes and test models of light echoes developed by Patat et al. (2005). HST photometry of the SN 1991T echo shows a fading which is consistent with scattering by dust distributed in a sphere or shell around the supernova. Light echoes have the potential to answer questions about the progenitors of Type Ia supernovae and more effort should be made for their detection given the importance of Type Ia supernovae to measurements of dark energy.
Type Ia supernovae, the thermonuclear explosions of white dwarf stars composed of carbon and oxygen, were instrumental as distance indicators in establishing the acceleration of the universe's expansion. However, the physics of the explosion are debated. Here we report a systematic spectral analysis of a large sample of well observed type Ia supernovae. Mapping the velocity distribution of the main products of nuclear burning, we constrain theoretical scenarios. We find that all supernovae have low-velocity cores of stable iron-group elements. Outside this core, nickel-56 dominates the supernova ejecta. The outer extent of the iron-group material depends on the amount of nickel-56 and coincides with the inner extent of silicon, the principal product of incomplete burning. The outer extent of the bulk of silicon is similar in all SNe, having an expansion velocity of ~11000 km/s and corresponding to a mass of slightly over one solar mass. This indicates that all the supernovae considered here burned similar masses, and suggests that their progenitors had the same mass. Synthetic light curve parameters and three-dimensional explosion simulations support this interpretation. A single explosion scenario, possibly a delayed detonation, may thus explain most type Ia supernovae.
We explore the relationship between the models for progenitor systems of Type Ia supernovae and the properties of the supernova remnants that evolve after the explosion. Most models for Type Ia progenitors in the single degenerate scenario predict substantial outflows during the presupernova evolution. Expanding on previous work, we estimate the imprint of these outflows on the structure of the circumstellar medium at the time of the supernova explosion, and the effect that this modified circumstellar medium has on the evolution of the ensuing supernova remnant. We compare our simulations with the observational properties of known Type Ia supernova remnants in the Galaxy (Kepler, Tycho, SN 1006), the Large Magellanic Cloud (0509-67.5, 0519-69.0, N103B), and M31 (SN 1885). We find that optically thick outflows from the white dwarf surface (sometimes known as accretion winds) with velocities above 200 km/s excavate large low-density cavities around the progenitors. Such large cavities are incompatible with the dynamics of the forward shock and the X-ray emission from the shocked ejecta in all the Type Ia remnants that we have examined.
We present spectra of six Type Ia and two Type II supernovae obtained in June 2002 at the William Herschel Telescope during a search for Type Ia supernovae (SNIa) at intermediate redshift. Supernova type identification and phase determination are performed using a fitting technique based on a Xi2 minimization against a series of model templates. The spectra range from z=0.033 to z=0.328, including one spectroscopically underluminous SNIa at z=0.033. This set of spectra significantly increases the sample of well-observed type SNIa supernovae available in the range 0.15< z <0.35. Together with the twelve supernovae observed by our team in 1999 in the same redshift range, they form an homogeneous sample of seventeen type Ia supernovae with comparable signal-to-noise ratio and regular phase sampling in a still largely unexplored region of the redshift space.
Supernova neutrinos, which arrive at Earth earlier than light, allow for the earliest determination of the direction of the supernova. The topic of this paper is to study how accurately we can determine the supernova direction. We simulate supernova neutrino events at the SuperKamiokande detector, using a realistic supernova model and several realistic neutrino oscillation models. With the results of our simulation, we can restrict the supernova direction to be within a circle of radius $9^\circ$. In several neutrino oscillation models, this accuracy is increased to $8^\circ$. We also discuss the influence of an accident that occurred at the SuperKamiokande detector. After repair of the detector, using the remaining PMTs, the accuracy becomes about $12^\circ$ for no oscillation.
Recently, we suggested that low-energy beta-beam neutrinos can be very useful for the study of supernova neutrino interactions. In this paper, we examine the use of a such experiment for the analysis of a supernova neutrino signal. Since supernova neutrinos are oscillating, it is very likely that the terrestrial spectrum of supernova neutrinos of a given flavor will not be the same as the energy distribution with which these neutrinos were first emitted. We demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed method for untangling multiple neutrino spectra. This is an essential feature of any model aiming at gaining information about the supernova mechanism, probing proto-neutron star physics, and understanding supernova nucleosynthesis, such as the neutrino process and the r-process. We also consider the efficacy of different experimental approaches including measurements at multiple beam energies and detector configurations.
The progenitor mass of type IIP supernova can be determined from either hydrodynamic modeling of the event or pre-explosion observations. To compare these approaches, we determine parameters of the sub-luminous supernova 2005cs and estimate its progenitor mass. We compute the hydrodynamic models of the supernova to describe its light curves and expansion velocity data. We estimate a presupernova mass of 17.3 Msun, an explosion energy of 4.1x10^{50} erg, a presupernova radius of 600 Rsun, and a radioactive Ni-56 mass of 0.0082 Msun. The derived progenitor mass of SN 2005cs is 18.2 Msun, which is in-between those of low-luminosity and normal type IIP supernovae. The obtained progenitor mass of SN 2005cs is higher than derived from pre-explosion images. The masses of four type IIP supernovae estimated by means of hydrodynamic modeling are systematically higher than the average progenitor mass for the 9-25 Msun mass range. This result, if confirmed for a larger sample, would imply that a serious revision of the present-day view on the progenitors of type IIP supernovae is required.
The atmosphere of the extremely high-velocity (530-920 km/s) early B-type star HD271791 is enriched in $\alpha$-process elements, which suggests that this star is a former secondary component of a massive tight binary system and that its surface was polluted by the nucleosynthetic products after the primary star exploded in a supernova. It was proposed that the (asymmetric) supernova explosion unbind the system and that the secondary star (HD271791) was released at its orbital velocity in the direction of Galactic rotation. In this Letter we show that to explain the Galactic rest-frame velocity of HD271791 within the framework of the binary-supernova scenario, the stellar remnant of the supernova explosion (a $\la$ 10 Msun black hole) should receive an unrealistically large kick velocity of $\geq$ 750-1200 km/s$. We therefore consider the binary-supernova scenario as highly unlikely and instead propose that HD271791 attained its peculiar velocity in the course of a strong dynamical three- or four-body encounter in the dense core of the parent star cluster. Our proposal implies that by the moment of encounter HD271791 was a member of a massive post-supernova binary.
The mechanism of core-collapse supernova explosions must draw on the energy provided by gravitational collapse and transfer the necessary fraction to the kinetic and internal energy of the ejecta. Despite many decades of concerted theoretical effort, the detailed mechanism of core-collapse supernova explosions is still unknown, but indications are strong that multi-D processes lie at its heart. This opens up the possibility of probing the supernova mechanism with gravitational waves, carrying direct dynamical information from the supernova engine deep inside a dying massive star. I present a concise overview of the physics and primary multi-D dynamics in neutrino-driven, magnetorotational, and acoustically-driven core-collapse supernova explosion scenarios. Discussing and contrasting estimates for the gravitational-wave emission characteristics of these mechanisms, I argue that their gravitational-wave signatures are clearly distinct and that the observation (or non-observation) of gravitational waves from a nearby core-collapse event could put strong constraints on the supernova mechanism.
The observational signatures of the first cosmic explosions and their chemical imprint on second-generation stars both crucially depend on how heavy elements mix within the star at the earliest stages of the blast. We present numerical simulations of the early evolution of Population III pair-instability supernovae with the new adaptive mesh refinement code CASTRO. In stark contrast to 15 - 40 Msun core-collapse primordial supernovae, we find no mixing in most 150 - 250 Msun pair-instability supernovae out to times well after breakout from the surface of the star. This may be the key to determining the mass of the progenitor of a primeval supernova, because vigorous mixing will cause emission lines from heavy metals such as Fe and Ni to appear much sooner in the light curves of core-collapse supernovae than in those of pair-instability explosions. Our results also imply that unlike low-mass Pop III supernovae, whose collective metal yields can be directly compared to the chemical abundances of extremely metal-poor stars, further detailed numerical simulations will be required to determine the nucleosynthetic imprint of very massive Pop III stars on their direct descendants.
Pristine stars with masses between ~140 and 260 M_sun are theoretically predicted to die as pair-instability supernovae. These very massive progenitors could come from Pop III stars in the early universe. We model the light curves and spectra of pair-instability supernovae over a range of masses and envelope structures. At redshifts of reionization z >= 6, we calculate the rates and detectability of pair-instability and core collapse supernovae, and show that with the James Webb Space Telescope, it is possible to determine the contribution of Pop III and Pop II stars toward reionization by constraining the stellar initial mass function at that epoch using these supernovae. We also find the rates of Type Ia supernovae, and show that they are not rare during reionization, and can be used to probe the mass function at 4-8 M_sun. If the budget of ionizing photons was dominated by contributions from top-heavy Pop III stars, we predict that the bright end of the galaxy luminosity function will be contaminated by pair-instability supernovae.
Despite decades of dedicated efforts there are still basic questions to answer with regard to Supernova progenitor systems and explosion mechanisms. In particular, in the last years a number of exceptionally bright objects and extremely faint events have demonstrated an unexpected large Supernova variety. The large number of Supernovae candidates at different redshifts provided by the next generation surveys, from ground and space, will allow to reach a better insight of the Supernova events in all their flavours. In particular it will be the possible to assess the systematics of type Ia Supernovae as distance indicator at any redshift. The Gaia astrometric mission is expected to discover a huge number of transient events, including Supernovae, which will be immediately disseminated to the astronomical community by a transients alert system for a suitable follow up.
Elemental and isotopic abundances are the fossils of galactic archaeology. The observed [X/Fe]-[Fe/H] relations in the Galactic bulge and disk and the mass-metallicity relation of galaxies are roughly reproduced with chemodynamical simulations of galaxies under the standard \Lambda-CDM picture and standard stellar physics. The isotopic ratios such as ^{17,18}O and ^{25,26}Mg may require a refinement of modelling of supernova and asymptotic giant branch stars. The recent observation of the Carbon-rich damped Lyman \alpha system can be reproduced only with faint core-collapse supernovae. This suggests that chemical enrichment by the first stars in the first galaxies is driven not by pair-instability supernovae but by core-collapse supernovae (\sim 20-50M_\odot). The observed F abundances can be reproduced with the neutrino processes of core-collapse supernovae. As in F, the observations of elemental abundances in small systems may requires further complications of chemical enrichment. In globular clusters the relative contribution from low-mass supernovae is likely to be smaller than in the field, while the contribution from massive supernovae seems smaller in dwarf spheroidal galaxies than in the solar neighbourhood.
We make use of publicly available results from N-body Millennium Simulation to create mock samples of lensed supernovae type Ia and core-collapse. Simulating galaxy-galaxy lensing we derive the rates of lensed supernovae and find than at redshifts higher that 0.5 about 0.06 per cent of supernovae will be lensed by a factor two or more. Future wide field surveys like Gaia or LSST should be able to detect lensed supernovae in their unbiased sky monitoring. Gaia (from 2013) will detect at least 2 cases whereas LSST (from 2018) will see more than 500 a year. Large number of future lensed supernovae will allow to verify results of cosmological simulations. The strong galaxy- galaxy lensing gives an opportunity to reach high-redshift supernovae type Ia and extend the Hubble diagram sample.
Using our previously derived simple analytic expression for the bolometric light curves of supernovae, we demonstrate that the collision of the fast debris of ordinary supernova explosions with relatively slow-moving shells from pre-supernova eruptions can produce the observed bolometric light curves of superluminous supernovae (SLSNe) of all types. These include both, those which can be explained as powered by spinning-down millisecond magnetars and those which cannot. That and the observed close similarity between the bolometric light-curves of SLSNe and ordinary interacting SNe suggest that SLSNe are powered mainly by collisions with relatively slow moving circumstellar shells from pre-supernova eruptions rather than by the spin-down of millisecond magnetars born in core collapse supernova explosions.
The Ultra-Violet Optical Telescope on the Swift spacecraft has observed hundreds of supernovae, covering all major types and most subtypes. Here we introduce the Swift Optical/Ultraviolet Supernova Archive (SOUSA), which will contain all of the supernova images and photometry. We describe the observation and reduction procedures and how they impact the final data. We show photometry from well-observed examples of most supernova classes, whose absolute magnitudes and colors may be used to infer supernova types in the absence of a spectrum. A full understanding of the variety within classes and a robust photometric separation of the groups requires a larger sample, which will be provided by the final archive. The data from the existing Swift supernovae are also useful for planning future observations with Swift as well as future UV observatories.
Consistency between Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP) and SDSS-II supernova (SN) survey ugri measurements has been evaluated by comparing SDSS and CSP photometry for nine spectroscopically confirmed Type Ia supernova observed contemporaneously by both programs. The CSP data were transformed into the SDSS photometric system. Sources of systematic uncertainty have been identified, quantified, and shown to be at or below the 0.023 magnitude level in all bands. When all photometry for a given band is combined, we find average magnitude differences of equal to or less than 0.011 magnitudes in ugri, with rms scatter ranging from 0.043 to 0.077 magnitudes. The u band agreement is promising, with the caveat that only four of the nine supernovae are well-observed in u and these four exhibit an 0.038 magnitude supernova-to-supernova scatter in this filter.
The discovery of acceleration and dark energy arguably constitutes the most revolutionary discovery in astrophysics in recent years. Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO) played a key role in this amazing discovery through three systematic supernova surveys organized by staff astronomers: the "Tololo Supernova Program" (1986-2000), the Calan/Tololo Project (1989-1993), and the "High-Z Supernova Search Team" (1994-1998). CTIO's state of the art instruments also were fundamental in the independent discovery of acceleration by the "Supernova Cosmology Project" (1992-1999). Here I summarize the work on supernovae carried out from CTIO that led to the discovery of acceleration and dark energy and provide a brief historical summary on the use of Type Ia supernovae in cosmology in order to provide context for the CTIO contribution.
We perform smoothed-particle hydrodynamical simulations of the explosion of a helium star in a close binary system, and study the effects of the explosion on the companion star as well as the effect of the presence of the companion on the supernova remnant. By simulating the mechanism of the supernova from just after core bounce until the remnant shell passes the stellar companion, we are able to separate the various effects leading to the final system parameters. In the final system, we measure the mass stripping and ablation from, and the velocity kick imparted to, the companion star, as well as the structure of the supernova shell. The presence of the companion star produces a conical cavity in the expanding supernova remnant, and loss of material from the companion causes the supernova remnant to be more metal-rich on one side and more hydrogen-rich (from the companion material) around the cavity. Following the removal of mass from the companion, we study its subsequent evolution and compare it with a single star not subjected to a supernova impact.
The detection of supernova relic neutrinos could provide precious information on the evolution of the universe, the formation of stars, the mechanism of supernova bursts and the related neutrino physics. Many experiments, such as Kamland, Borexino, Sudbury Neutrino Observatory and Super-Kamiokande have conducted searches for the supernova relic neutrinos. However, no supernova relic neutrino signal has been observed until now. This paper reports the background study on the supernova relic neutrinos search for the future neutrino experiment in SuperK-Gd project. The expected event rate for various background sources and supernova relic neutrino models are calculated, respectively.
We investigate the possible effects of the supernova ejecta hitting the companion star in iPTF 13bvn, focusing on the observable features when it becomes visible. iPTF 13bvn is a type Ib supernova that may become the first case that its progenitor is identified as a binary by near future observations. According to calculations by Bersten et al. (2014), the progenitor should have a mass $\approx3.5M_\odot$ to reproduce the supernova light curve, and such compact stars could only be produced via binary evolution. This is one of the reasons that we expect the progenitor to be a binary, but it should be confirmed by observing the remaining companion after the supernova. Their evolutionary calculations suggest that the companion star will be an overluminous OB star at the moment of supernova. With a combination of hydrodynamical and evolutionary simulations, we find that the secondary star will be heated by the supernova ejecta and expand to have larger luminosities and lower surface effective temperatures. The star will look rather like a red super giant, and this should be taken into account when searching for the companion star in the supernova ejecta in future observations.
Novae and supernovae are rare astronomical events that would have had an influence on the sky-watching peoples who witnessed them. Although several bright novae/supernovae have been visible during recorded human history, there are many proposed but no confirmed accounts of supernovae in oral traditions or material culture. Criteria are established for confirming novae/supernovae in oral and material culture, and claims from around the world are discussed to determine if they meet these criteria. Australian Aboriginal traditions are explored for possible descriptions of novae/supernovae. Although representations of supernovae may exist in Indigenous traditions, and an account of a nova in Aboriginal traditions has been confirmed, there are currently no confirmed accounts in Indigenous oral or material traditions.
A dense neutrino medium such as that inside a core-collapse supernova can experience collective flavor conversion or oscillations because of the neutral-current weak interaction among the neutrinos. This phenomenon has been studied in a restricted, stationary supernova model which possesses the (spatial) spherical symmetry about the center of the supernova and the (directional) axial symmetry around the radial direction. Recently it has been shown that these spatial and directional symmetries can be broken spontaneously by collective neutrino oscillations. In this paper we analyze the neutrino flavor instabilities in a time-dependent supernova model. Our results show that collective neutrino oscillations start at approximately the same radius in both the stationary and time-dependent supernova models unless there exist very rapid variations in local physical conditions on timescales of a few microseconds or shorter. Our results also suggest that collective neutrino oscillations can vary rapidly with time in the regimes where they do occur which need to be studied in time-dependent supernova models.
Within our Galaxy, supernova remnants are believed to be the major sources of cosmic rays up to the "knee". However important questions remain regarding the share of the hadronic and leptonic components, and the fraction of the supernova energy channelled into these components. We address such question by the means of numerical simulations that combine a hydrodynamic treatment of the shock wave with a kinetic treatment of particle acceleration. Performing 3D simulations allows us to produce synthetic projected maps and spectra of the thermal and non-thermal emission, that can be compared with multi-wavelength observations (in radio, X-rays, and gamma-rays). Supernovae come in different types, and although their energy budget is of the same order, their remnants have different properties, and so may contribute in different ways to the pool of Galactic cosmic-rays. Our first simulations were focused on thermonuclear supernovae, like Tycho's SNR, that usually occur in a mostly undisturbed medium. Here we present our 3D simulations of core-collapse supernovae, like the Cas A SNR, that occur in a more complex medium bearing the imprint of the wind of the progenitor star.
A detection of a core-collapse supernova signal with an Advanced LIGO and Virgo gravitational-wave detector network will allow us to measure astrophysical parameters of the source. In real advanced gravitational-wave detector data there are transient noise artifacts that may mimic a true gravitational-wave signal. In this paper, we outline a procedure implemented in the Supernova Model Evidence Extractor (SMEE) that determines if a core-collapse supernova signal candidate is a noise artefact, a rapidly-rotating core-collapse supernova signal, or a neutrino explosion mechanism core-collapse supernova signal. Further to this, we use the latest available three-dimensional gravitational-wave core-collapse supernova simulations, and we outline a new procedure for the rejection of background noise transients when only one detector is operational. We find the minimum SNR needed to detect all waveforms is reduced when using three-dimensional waveforms as signal models.
We investigate the possibility that the energetic Type II supernova OGLE-2014-SN-073 is powered by a fallback accretion following the failed explosion of a massive star. Taking massive hydrogen-rich supernova progenitor models, we estimate the fallback accretion rate and calculate the light curve evolution of supernovae powered by the fallback accretion. We find that such fallback accretion powered models can reproduce the overall observational properties of OGLE-2014-SN-073. It may imply that some failed supernovae could be observed as energetic supernovae like OGLE-2014-SN-073 instead of faint supernovae as previously proposed.
Evidence of a supernova event, discussed in Wallner et al., was discovered in the deep-sea crusts with two signals dating back to 2-3 and 7-9 Myr ago. In this contribution, we place constraints on the birth-site of the supernova progenitors from the ejecta timeline, the initial mass function, and the ages of nearby stellar groups. We investigated the Scorpius-Centaurus OB Association, the nearest site of recent massive star formation, and the moving group Tucana-Horologium. Using the known stellar mass of the remaining massive stars within these subgroups and factoring in travel time for the ejecta, we have constrained the ages and masses of the supernova progenitors by using the initial mass function and then compared the results to the canonical ages of each subgroup. Our results identify the Upper Scorpius and Lower Centaurus-Crux subgroups as unlikely birth-sites for these supernovae. We find that Tucana-Horologium is the likely birth-site of the supernova 7-9 Myr ago and Upper Centaurus-Lupus is the likely birth-site for the supernova 2-3 Myr ago.
This contribution presents the results of workshop 8 (supernovae) held during the IAU Symposium 339 "Southern Horizons in Time-Domain Astronomy" at Stellenbosch University, South Africa. Workshop 8 covered a cornucopia of topics with each one having a short presentation by a pre-determined participant followed by a round table discussion. During the first of two sessions, G. Hosseinzadeh and H. Kuncarayakti presented results of their recent works on interacting supernovae. This includes both the intriguing Type Ibn supernova subclass, as well as SN 2017dio, which appears to be the first Type Ic supernova to exhibit signatures of hydrogen-rich circumstellar interaction at all phases. During the second session, M. Sullivan provided an excellent summary related to the future of transient science in the era of Big Data, and the participants discussed strategies to determine which targets and fields should be selected for spectroscopic followup. Workshop 8 concluded with a rather heated discussion regarding the need for the IAU supernova working group to consider to modify the current criteria for a confirmed supernova to receive an official IAU designation.
The histories of core-collapse supernova theory and of neutrino physics have paralleled one another for more than seventy years. Almost every development in neutrino physics necessitated modifications in supernova models. What has emerged is a complex and rich dynamical scenario for stellar death that is being progressively better tested by increasingly sophisiticated computer simulations. Though there is still much to learn about the agency and details of supernova explosions, whatever final theory emerges will have the neutrino at its core. I summarize in this brief contribution some of the salient developments in neutrino physics as they related to supernova theory, while avoiding any attempt to review the hundreds of pivotal papers that have pushed supernova theory forward. My goal has been merely to highlight the debt of supernova astrophysics to neutrino physics.
We propose a new constraint on light (sub-GeV) particles beyond the Standard Model that can be produced inside the proto-neutron star core resulting from the core-collapse supernova explosion. It is derived by demanding that the energy carried by exotic particles being transferred to the progenitor stellar envelopes must not exceed the explosion energy of $\lesssim 2\cdot 10^{51}$ erg of observed supernovae. We show specifically that for the case of a dark photon which kinetically mixes with the SM photon and decays predominantly to an $e^\pm$ pair, a smaller mixing parameter of one order of magnitude below the well-established supernova cooling bound can be excluded. Furthermore, our bound fills the gap between the cooling bound and the region constrained by (non)observation of gamma rays produced from supernovae for dark photons lighter than ~ 20 MeV. Our result also rules out the possibility of aiding successful supernova explosions by transferring energy from the supernova core to the shock with exotic particles.
Since the original detection of core-collapse supernova neutrinos in 1987, all large neutrino experiments seek to detect the neutrinos from the next nearby supernova. Among them, liquid argon time projection chambers (LArTPCs) offer a unique sensitivity to the electron neutrino flux of a supernova. However, the low energy of these events (scale of MeVs), and the fact that all large (multi-tonne) LArTPCs operating at the moment are located near the Earth's surface, and are therefore subject to an intense cosmic ray flux, makes triggering on the supernova neutrinos very challenging. Instead, MicroBooNE has pioneered a novel approach for detecting supernova neutrinos based on a continuous readout stream and a delayed trigger generated by other neutrino detectors (the Supernova Early Warning System, or SNEWS). MicroBooNE's data is stored temporarily for a few days, awaiting a SNEWS alert to prompt the permanent recording of the data. In order to cope with the large data rates produced by the continuous readout of the TPC and the PMT systems of MicroBooNE, FPGA-based zero-suppression algorithms have been developed.
A notable feature of the two standard models for thermonuclear and core-collapse supernovae is that, although these two models are fundamentally different, the respective supernova types have quite similar rates and appearances. For instance, both types occur one to several times per century per typical galaxy and both types seed the universe with the heavy elements essential to life. In spite of this, neither standard model provides a reasonably problem-free description of its target phenomenon. A major obstacle to providing a unified picture of supernovae would seem to be the fact that type Ia supernovae occur typically with gigayear delay times after the cessation of carbon fusion while the core-collapse explosions occur only days after such fusion cessation. In this article we study the possibility of extending the successful supersymmetric model for type Ia supernovae to core-collapse events. The question is whether and under what assumptions a phase transition to an exact supersymmetric background can efficiently explain both type Ia and core collapse supernovae.
The fastest ejecta of supernova explosions propagate as a precursor to the main supernova shock wave, and can be quite energetic. The spectrum of such fast ejecta is estimated based on recent analytic and numerical supernova models, and found to be a power law having a cutoff at an energy of order 10 MeV/nucl, the precise value of which depends on the supernova mass and energetics. With cutoffs in this range there can be significant flux with energies above the thresholds for $\gamma$-ray and Li, Be, and B production. These nuclear interactions should inevitably accompany the passage of prompt supernova ejecta through the surrounding medium. The fast particle composition is that of the outermost layers of the progenitor; if the progenitor experienced significant loss of its envelope to a companion or by mass loss, then the composition is nonsolar, and in particular, metal-rich. Such a composition and spectrum of fast particles is required to explain the recent COMPTEL observations of $\gamma$-ray emission in Orion. Supernova ejecta from one progenitor having lost a large amount of mass are shown to quantitatively account for the Orion $\gamma$ rays, and to imply the presence of other, weaker lines and of a supernova explosion in Orion in the last $\la 10^4$ years. Implications for this mechanism as a mode of nucleosynthesis, and as a potential supernova diagnostic, are discussed. Model dependences and uncertainties are noted, and the need is shown for accurate measurements of $\gamma$-ray and spallation production cross sections at energies near threshold.
The feasibility of using near-infrared observations to discover supernovae in the nuclear and circumnuclear regions of nearby starburst galaxies is investigated. We provide updated estimates of the intrinsic core-collapse supernova rates in these regions. We discuss the problem of extinction, and present new estimates of the extinction towards 33 supernova remnants in the starburst galaxy M 82. This is done using H I and H_2 column density measurements. We estimate the molecular to atomic hydrogen mass ratio to be 7.4 +- 1.0 in M 82. We have assembled near-infrared photometric data for a total of 13 core-collapse supernovae, some unpublished hitherto. This constitutes the largest database of IR light curves for such events. We show that the IR light curves fall into two classes, ``ordinary'' and ``slow-declining''. Template JHKL light curves are derived for both classes. For ordinary core-collapse supernovae, the average peak JHKL absolute magnitudes are -18.4, -18.6, -18.6, and -19.0 respectively. The slow-declining core-collapse SNe are found to be significantly more luminous than the ordinary events, even at early times, having average peak JHKL absolute magnitudes of -19.9, -20.0, -20.0, and -20.4 respectively. We investigate the efficiency of a computerised image subtraction method in supernova detection. We then carry out a Monte Carlo simulation of a supernova search using K-band images of NGC 5962. The effects of extinction and observing strategy are discussed. We conclude that a modest observational programme will be able to discover a number of nuclear supernovae.
A newly formed black hole may be directly identified if late-time accretion of material from the base of the ejected envelope generates a luminosity that is observable in the tail of the supernova light curve. In this work we estimate the rate at which events where the black hole ``emerges'' in the supernova light curve can be detected with present capabilities. Our investigation is based on an analytical model of the accretion luminosity at emergence as a function of progenitor mass, coupled to the inferred rate of observed Type II supernovae in nearby galaxies. We find through a parameter survey that under optimistic assumptions the potential rate of observable events can be as high as several per year. However, supernovae which produce black holes are also likely to be low energy explosions and therefore subluminous, as was the case for the best candidate to date, SN1997D. If black hole-forming supernovae are underdetected owing to lower luminosities, the rate of observing black hole emergence is probably not larger than once every few years. We therefore emphasize the importance of dedicated searches for nearby supernovae as well as faint supernovae projects for improving the prospects of observationally certifying the supernova--black hole connection.
The evolution of type Ia supernova binary system progenitors is highly uncertain. Several evolutionary models predict that the accretion of mass onto the white dwarf is accompanied by mass ejection from the binary in the form of a powerful wind, but very few observations have been made during the initial phase of formation of supernovae remnants, when the interaction of supernova ejecta with presupernova wind could be tested. Here we present hydrodynamical simulations of supernova ejecta interaction with an ambient medium modified by presupernova wind. The structure of the ambient medium when the supernova explodes is very sensitive to the details of wind history, and the evolution of the supernova remnant can be affected during several thousand years. We have found that the forward shock expansion parameter is a good tool for discriminating between several wind models. The evolution of the supernova remnant in the presence of an ambient medium modified by interaction with pre-supernova wind cannot be described by a similarity solution. We also rule out simple models based on a circumstellar medium that merges smoothly with a uniform density ambient medium.
The data from the Chandra satellite on the iron emission lines in the afterglow of GRB 991216 are used to give further support for the EMBH theory, which links the origin of the energy of GRBs to the extractable energy of electromagnetic black holes (EMBHs), leading to an interpretation of the GRB-supernova correlation. Following the relative space-time transformation (RSTT) paradigm and the interpretation of the burst structure (IBS) paradigm, we introduce a paradigm for the correlation between GRBs and supernovae. The following sequence of events is shown as kinematically possible and consistent with the available data: a) the GRB-progenitor star $P_1$ first collapses to an EMBH, b) the proper GRB (P-GRB) and the peak of the afterglow (E-APE) propagate in interstellar space until the impact on a supernova-progenitor star $P_2$ at a distance $\le 2.69\times 10^{17}$ cm, and they induce the supernova explosion, c) the accelerated baryonic matter (ABM) pulse, originating the afterglow, reaches the supernova remnants 18.5 hours after the supernova explosion and gives rise to the iron emission lines. Some considerations on the dynamical implementation of the paradigm are presented. The concept of induced supernova explosion introduced here specifically for the GRB-supernova correlation may have more general application in relativistic astrophysics.
Photometry is the most easily acquired information about supernovae. The light curves constructed from regular imaging provide signatures not only for the energy input, the radiation escape, the local environment and the progenitor stars, but also for the intervening dust. They are the main tool for the use of supernovae as distance indicators through the determination of the luminosity. The light curve of SN 1987A still is the richest and longest observed example for a core-collapse supernova. Despite the peculiar nature of this object, as explosion of a blue supergiant, it displayed all the characteristics of Type II supernovae. The light curves of Type Ib/c supernovae are more homogeneous, but still display the signatures of explosions in massive stars, among them early interaction with their circumstellar material. Wrinkles in the near-uniform appearance of thermonuclear (Type Ia) supernovae have emerged during the past decade. Subtle differences have been observed especially at near-infrared wavelengths. Interestingly, the light curve shapes appear to correlate with a variety of other characteristics of these supernovae. The construction of bolometric light curves provides the most direct link to theoretical predictions and can yield sorely needed constraints for the models. First steps in this direction have been already made.
Stars more massive than $\sim$ 20 - 25 \ms form a black hole at the end of their evolution. Stars with non-rotating black holes are likely to collapse "quietly" ejecting a small amount of heavy elements (Faint supernovae). In contrast, stars with rotating black holes are likely to give rise to very energetic supernovae (Hypernovae). We present distinct nucleosynthesis features of these two types of "black-hole-forming" supernovae. Nucleosynthesis in Hypernovae is characterized by larger abundance ratios (Zn,Co,V,Ti)/Fe and smaller (Mn,Cr)/Fe than normal supernovae, which can explain the observed trend of these ratios in extremely metal-poor stars. Nucleosynthesis in Faint supernovae is characterized by a large amount of fall-back. We show that the abundance pattern of the recently discovered most Fe-poor star, HE0107-5240, and other extremely metal-poor carbon-rich stars are in good accord with those of black-hole-forming supernovae, but not pair-instability supernovae. This suggests that black-hole-forming supernovae made important contributions to the early Galactic (and cosmic) chemical evolution. Finally we discuss the nature of First (Pop III) Stars.
During the last few years, a number of exceptional core-collapse supernovae (SNe) have been discovered. Their kinetic energy of the explosions are larger by more than an order of magnitude than the typical values for this type of SNe, so that these SNe have been called `Hypernovae'. We first describe how the basic properties of hypernovae can be derived from observations and modeling. These hypernovae seem to come from rather massive stars, thus forming black holes. On the other hand, there are some examples of massive SNe with only a small kinetic energy. We suggest that stars with non-rotating black holes are likely to collapse "quietly" ejecting a small amount of heavy elements (Faint supernovae). In contrast, stars with rotating black holes are likely to give rise to very energetic supernovae (Hypernovae). We present distinct nucleosynthesis features of these two types of "black-hole-forming" supernovae. Hypernova nucleosynthesis is characterized by larger abundance ratios (Zn,Co,V,Ti)/Fe and smaller (Mn,Cr)/Fe. Nucleosynthesis in Faint supernovae is characterized by a large amount of fall-back. We show that the abundance pattern of the most Fe deficient star, HE0107-5240, and other extremely metal-poor carbon-rich stars are in good accord with those of black-hole-forming supernovae, but not pair-instability supernovae. This suggests that black-hole-forming supernovae made important contributions to the early Galactic (and cosmic) chemical evolution.
The supernova remnants left behind by Type Ia supernovae provide an excellent opportunity for the study of these enigmatic objects. In a previous work, we showed that it is possible to use the X-ray spectra of young Type Ia supernova remnants to explore the physics of Type Ia supernovae and identify the relevant mechanism underlying these explosions. Our simulation technique is based on hydrodynamic and nonequilibrium ionization calculations of the interaction of a grid of Type Ia explosion models with the surrounding ambient medium, coupled to an X-ray spectral code. In this work we explore the influence of two key parameters on the shape of the X-ray spectrum of the ejecta: the density of the ambient medium around the supernova progenitor and the efficiency of collisionless electron heating at the reverse shock. We also discuss the performance of recent 3D simulations of Type Ia SN explosions in the context of the X-ray spectra of young SNRs. We find a better agreement with the observations for Type Ia supernova models with stratified ejecta than for 3D deflagration models with well mixed ejecta. We conclude that our grid of Type Ia supernova remnant models can improve our understanding of these objects and their relationship to the supernovae that originated them.
We investigate the prospects of future supernova searches to get meaningful constraints about the cosmic star formation history (CSFH) and the delay time of type Ia supernovae from star formation (tau_{Ia}), based only on supernova data. Here we parameterize the CSFH by two parameters, alpha and beta that are the evolutionary indices (proportional to (1+z)^{alpha, beta}) at z <~ 1 and >~ 1, respectively, and quantitatively examined how well the three parameters (alpha, beta, and tau_{Ia}) can be constrained in ongoing and future supernova surveys. We found that the type classification of detected supernovae down to the magnitude of I_{AB} ~ 27 is essential, to get useful constraint on beta. The parameter tau_{Ia} can also be constrained within an accuracy of ~ 1--2 Gyr, without knowing alpha that is somewhat degenerate with tau_{Ia}. This might be potentially achieved by ground-based surveys but depending on the still highly uncertain type-classification by imaging data. More reliable classification will be achieved by the SNAP mission. The supernova counts at a magnitude level of I_{AB} or K_{AB} ~ 30 will allow us to break degeneracies between alpha and tau_{Ia} and independently constrain all the three parameters, even without knowing supernova types. This can be achieved by the SNAP and JWST missions, having different strength of larger statistics and reach to higher redshifts, respectively. The dependence of observable quantities on survey time intervals is also quantitatively calculated and discussed.
An important and perhaps critical clue to the mechanism driving the explosion of massive stars as supernovae is provided by the accumulating evidence for asymmetry in the explosion. Indirect evidence comes from high pulsar velocities, associations of supernovae with long-soft gamma-ray bursts, and asymmetries in late-time emission-line profiles. Spectropolarimetry provides a direct probe of young supernova geometry, with higher polarization generally indicating a greater departure from spherical symmetry. Large polarizations have been measured for 'stripped-envelope' (that is, type Ic) supernovae, which confirms their non-spherical morphology; but the explosions of massive stars with intact hydrogen envelopes (type II-P supernovae) have shown only weak polarizations at the early times observed. Here we report multi-epoch spectropolarimetry of a classic type II-P supernova that reveals the abrupt appearance of significant polarization when the inner core is first exposed in the thinning ejecta (~90 days after explosion). We infer a departure from spherical symmetry of at least 30 per cent for the inner ejecta. Combined with earlier results, this suggests that a strongly non-spherical explosion may be a generic feature of core-collapse supernovae of all types, where the asphericity in type II-P supernovae is cloaked at early times by the massive, opaque, hydrogen envelope.
Galactic cosmic rays are widely believed to be accelerated in expanding shock waves initiated by supernova explosions. The theory of diffusive shock acceleration of cosmic rays is now well established, but two fundamental questions remain partly unanswered: what is the acceleration efficiency, i.e. the fraction of the total supernova energy converted to cosmic-ray energy, and what is the maximum kinetic energy achieved by particles accelerated in supernova explosions? Recent observations of supernova remnants, in X-rays with the Chandra and XMM-Newton satellites and in very-high-energy gamma rays with several ground-based atmospheric Cerenkov telescopes, have provided new pieces of information concerning these two questions. After a review of these observations and their current interpretations, I show that complementary information on the diffusive shock acceleration process can be obtained by studying the radio emission from extragalactic supernovae. As an illustration, a nonlinear model of diffusive shock acceleration is applied to the radio light curves of the supernova SN 1993J, which exploded in the nearby galaxy M81. The results of the model suggest that most of the Galactic cosmic rays may be accelerated during the early phase of interaction between the supernova ejecta and the wind lost from the progenitor star.
We have made sensitive milliarcsecond-resolution radio images of the nearby merger galaxy Arp 299 at four epochs spread over 18 months between 2003 and 2005. The combined data revealed a total of 30 point sources in the two primary merger nuclei. Twenty-five of these are found in the northeastern nucleus (component "A"=IC 694) over a region ~100 pc in diameter, while five are in the southwestern nucleus (component "B1"=NGC 3690) within a region ~30 pc in size. These objects are interpreted as young supernovae and supernova remnants; the ratio of the source counts in nuclei A and B1 is approximately equal to the ratio of their predicted supernova rates. An approximate luminosity function has been derived for nucleus A, and indicates that it might contain as many as 500-1000 compact radio sources more powerful than Cas A; the integrated flux density of these sources would be about 20% of the total flux density seen at lower resolution. A new supernova occurred in nucleus B1 in the first half of 2005, having a peak radio power at least 2,000 times the present power of Cassiopeia A. This supernova is located within 0.4 pc (projected distance) of an apparently older supernova remnant, making it very likely that this indicates the presence of a massive super star cluster within nucleus B1. Comparison of the typical radio flux densities of our compact radio sources to the observed X-ray luminosities of nuclei A and B1 indicates that it is possible that one radio source in each nucleus actually could be associated with an active galactic nucleus rather than being a supernova remnant.
Shock breakout is the earliest, readily-observable emission from a core-collapse supernova explosion. Observing supernova shock breakout may yield information about the nature of the supernova shock prior to exiting the progenitor and, in turn, about the core-collapse supernova mechanism itself. X-ray Outburst 080109, later associated with SN 2008D, is a very well-observed example of shock breakout from a core-collapse supernova. Despite excellent observational coverage and detailed modeling, fundamental information about the shock breakout, such as the radius of breakout and driver of the light curve time scale, is still uncertain. The models constructed for explaining the shock breakout emission from SN 2008D all assume spherical symmetry. We present a study of the observational characteristics of {\it aspherical} shock breakout from stripped-envelope core-collapse supernovae. We conduct two-dimensional, jet-driven supernova simulations from stripped-envelope progenitors and calculate the resulting shock breakout X-ray spectra and light curves. The X-ray spectra evolve significantly in time as the shocks expand outward and are not well-fit by single-temperature and radius black bodies. The time scale of the X-ray burst light curve of the shock breakout is related to the shock crossing time of the progenitor, not the much shorter light crossing time that sets the light curve time scale in spherical breakouts. This could explain the long shock breakout light curve time scale observed for XRO 080109/SN 2008D.
Aims: Spectroscopic observations of Type Ia supernovae obtained at the New Technology Telescope (NTT) and the Nordic Optical Telescope (NOT), in conjunction with the SDSS-II Supernova Survey, are analysed. We use spectral indicators measured up to a month after the lightcurve peak luminosity to characterise the supernova properties, and examine these for potential correlations with host galaxy type, lightcurve shape, colour excess, and redshift. Methods: Our analysis is based on 89 Type Ia supernovae at a redshift interval z = 0.05 - 0.3, for which multiband SDSS photometry is available. A lower-z spectroscopy reference sample was used for comparisons over cosmic time. We present measurements of time series of pseudo equivalent widths and line velocities of the main spectral features in Type Ia supernovae. Results: Supernovae with shallower features are found predominantly among the intrinsically brighter slow declining supernovae. We detect the strongest correlation between lightcurve stretch and the Si ii 4000 absorption feature, which also correlates with the estimated mass and star formation rate of the host galaxy. We also report a tentative correlation between colour excess and spectral properties. If confirmed, this would suggest that moderate reddening of Type Ia supernovae is dominated by effects in the explosion or its immediate environment, as opposed to extinction by interstellar dust.
A variety of supernova events, including Type IIn supernovae and ultraluminous supernovae, appear to have lost up to solar masses of their envelopes in 10's to 100's of years leading up to the explosion. In order to explain the close timing of the mass loss and supernova events, we explore the possibility that the mass loss is driven by common envelope evolution of a compact object (neutron star or black hole) in the envelope of a massive star and the supernova is triggered by the inspiral of the compact object to the central core of the companion star. The expected rate of such events is smaller than the observed rate of Type IIn supernovae but the rates may agree within the uncertainties. The mass loss velocity is related to the escape velocity from the common envelope system and is comparable to the observed velocity of 100's of km s$^{-1}$ in Type IIn events. The mass loss is expected to be denser near the equatorial plane of the binary system and there is good evidence that the circumstellar media in Type IIn supernovae are asymmetric. Some of these supernova types show evidence for energies in excess of the canonical $10^{51}$ ergs, which might be the result of explosions from rapid accretion onto a compact object through a disk.
We use a sample of 45 core collapse supernovae detected with the Advanced Camera for Surveys on-board the Hubble Space Telescope to derive the core collapse supernova rate in the redshift range 0.1<z<1.3. In redshift bins centered on <z>=0.39, <z>=0.73, and <z>=1.11, we find rates 3.00 {+1.28}{-0.94}{+1.04}{-0.57}, 7.39 {+1.86}{-1.52}{+3.20}{-1.60}, and 9.57 {+3.76}{-2.80}{+4.96}{-2.80}, respectively, given in units yr^{-1} Mpc^{-3} 10^{-4} h_{70}^3. The rates have been corrected for host galaxy extinction, including supernovae missed in highly dust enshrouded environments in infrared bright galaxies. The first errors represent statistical while the second are the estimated systematic errors. We perform a detailed discussion of possible sources of systematic errors and note that these start to dominate over statistical errors at z>0.5, emphasizing the need to better control the systematic effects. For example, a better understanding of the amount of dust extinction in the host galaxies and knowledge of the supernova luminosity function, in particular the fraction of faint M > -15 supernovae, is needed to better constrain the rates. When comparing our results with the core collapse supernova rate based on the star formation rate, we find a good agreement, consistent with the supernova rate following the star formation rate, as expected.
As part of a spectroscopic survey of supernova remnant candidates in M83 using the Gemini-South telescope and GMOS, we have discovered one object whose spectrum shows very broad lines at H$\alpha$, [O~I] 6300,6363, and [O~III] 4959,5007, similar to those from other objects classified as `late time supernovae.' Although six historical supernovae have been observed in M83 since 1923, none were seen at the location of this object. Hubble Space Telescope Wide Field Camera 3 images show a nearly unresolved emission source, while Chandra and ATCA data reveal a bright X-ray source and nonthermal radio source at the position. Objects in other galaxies showing similar spectra are only decades post-supernova, which raises the possibility that the supernova that created this object occurred during the last century but was missed. Using photometry of nearby stars from the HST data, we suggest the precursor was at least 17 $\rm M_{sun}$, and the presence of broad H$\alpha$ in the spectrum makes a type II supernova likely. The supernova must predate the 1983 VLA radio detection of the object. We suggest examination of archival images of M83 to search for evidence of the supernova event that gave rise to this object, and thus provide a precise age.
We investigate the diversity in the wind density, supernova ejecta energy, and ejecta mass in Type IIn supernovae based on their rise times and peak luminosities. We show that the wind density and supernova ejecta properties can be estimated independently if both the rise time and peak luminosity are observed. The peak luminosity is mostly determined by the supernova properties and the rise time can be used to estimate the wind density. We find that the ejecta energy of Type IIn supernovae needs to vary by factors of 0.2-5 from the average if their ejecta mass is similar. The diversity in the observed rise times indicates that their wind density varies by factors of 0.2-2 from the average. We show that Type IIn superluminous supernovae should have not only large wind density but also large ejecta energy and/or small ejecta mass to explain their large luminosities and the rise times at the same time. We also note that the shock breakout does not necessarily occur in the wind even if it is optically thick, except for the case of superluminous supernovae, and we analyze the observational data both with and without assuming that the shock breakout occurs in the dense wind of Type IIn supernovae.
We propose that nebular H-alpha emission as detected in the Type Ic superluminous supernova iPTF13ehe stems from matter which is stripped from a companion star when the supernova ejecta collide with it. The temporal evolution, the line broadening, and the overall blueshift of the emission are consistent with this interpretation. We scale the nebular H-alpha luminosity predicted for Type Ia supernovae in single-degenerate systems to derive the stripped mass required to explain the H-alpha luminosity of iPTF13ehe. We find a stripped mass of 0.1 - 0.9 solar masses, assuming that the supernova luminosity is powered by radioactivity or magnetar spin down. Because a central heating source is required to excite the H-alpha emission, an interaction-powered model is not favored for iPTF13ehe if the H-alpha emission is from stripped matter. We derive a companion mass of more than 20 solar masses and a binary separation of less than about 20 companion radii based on the stripping efficiency during the collision, indicating that the supernova progenitor and the companion formed a massive close binary system. If Type Ic superluminous supernovae generally occur in massive close binary systems, the early brightening observed previously in several Type Ic superluminous supernovae may also be due to the collision with a close companion. Observations of nebular hydrogen emission in future Type Ic superluminous supernovae will enable us to test this interpretation.
Mapping supernovae to their progenitors is fundamental to understanding the collapse of massive stars. We investigate the red supergiant problem, which concerns why red supergiants with masses $\sim16$-$30 M_\odot$ have not been identified as progenitors of Type IIP supernovae, and the supernova rate problem, which concerns why the observed cosmic supernova rate is smaller than the observed cosmic star formation rate. We find key physics to solving these in the compactness parameter, which characterizes the density structure of the progenitor. If massive stars with compactness above $\xi_{2.5} \sim 0.2$ fail to produce canonical supernovae, (i) stars in the mass range $16$-$30 M_\odot$ populate an island of stars that have high $\xi_{2.5}$ and do not produce canonical supernovae, and (ii) the fraction of such stars is consistent with the missing fraction of supernovae relative to star formation. We support this scenario with a series of two- and three-dimensional radiation hydrodynamics core-collapse simulations. Using more than 300 progenitors covering initial masses $10.8$-$75 M_\odot$ and three initial metallicities, we show that high compactness is conducive to failed explosions. We then argue that a critical compactness of $\sim 0.2$ as the divide between successful and failed explosions is consistent with state-of-the-art three-dimensional core-collapse simulations. Our study implies that numerical simulations of core collapse need not produce robust explosions in a significant fraction of compact massive star initial conditions.
The coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering (CEvNS) plays a crucial role at the final evolution of stars. The detection of it would be of importance in astroparticle physics. Among all available neutrino sources, galactic supernovae give the highest neutrino flux in the MeV range. Among all liquid xenon dark matter experiments, XMASS has the largest sensitive volume and light yield. The possibility to detect galactic supernova via the CEvNS-process on xenon nuclei in the current XMASS detector was investigated. The total number of events integrated in about 18 seconds after the explosion of a supernova 10~kpc away from the Earth was expected to be from 3.5 to 21.1, depending on the supernova model used to predict the neutrino flux, while the number of background events in the same time window was measured to be negligible. All lead to very high possibility to detect CEvNS experimentally for the first time utilizing the combination of galactic supernovae and the XMASS detector. In case of a supernova explosion as close as Betelgeuse, the total observable events can be more than ten thousand, making it possible to distinguish different supernova models by examining the evolution of neutrino event rate in XMASS.
Although the Galactic supernova rate is about 2 per century, only few supernova remnants are associated with historical records. There are a few ancient Chinese records of "guest stars" that are probably sightings of supernovae for which the associated supernova remnant is not established. Here we present an X-ray study of the supernova remnant G7.7-3.7, as observed by XMM-Newton, and discuss its probable association with the guest star of 386 CE. This guest star occurred in the ancient Chinese asterism Nan-Dou, which is part of Sagittarius. The X-ray morphology of G7.7-3.7 shows an arc-like feature in the SNR south, which is characterized by an under-ionized plasma with sub-solar abundances, a temperature of 0.4--0.8 keV, and a density of $\sim 0.5(d/4 kpc)^{-0.5}$ cm$^{-3}$. A small shock age of $1.2\pm 0.6 (d/4 kpc)^{0.5}$ kyr is inferred from the low ionization timescale of $2.4^{+1.1}_{-1.3}\times 10^{10}$ cm$^{-3}$ s of the X-ray arc. The low foreground absorption ($N_H=3.5\pm0.5\times 10^{21}$ cm$^{-2}$) of G7.7-3.7 made the supernova explosion visible to the naked eyes on the Earth. The position of G7.7-3.7 is consistent with the event of 386 CE, and the X-ray properties suggest that also its age is consistent. Interestingly, the association between G7.7-3.7 and guest star 386 would suggest the supernova to be a low-luminosity supernova, in order to explain the not very long visibility (2--4 months) of the guest star.
I construct the class of supernovae and supernova progenitors that result from fatal common envelope evolution (CEE). The fatal CEE progenitors are stellar binary systems where a companion spirals-in inside the envelope of a giant star and merges with the core. The companion can be a neutron star (NS; or a black hole) that destroys the core and by that forms a common envelope jets supernova (CEJSN), a white dwarf (WD) that merges with the core to form a massive WD that later might explode as a Type Ia supernova (the core degenerate scenario), or a main sequence companion. In the latter case the outcome might be a core collapse supernova (CCSN) of a blue giant, a CCSN of type IIb or of type Ib. In another member of this class two giant stars merge and the two cores spiral-in toward each other to form a massive core that later explodes as a CCSN with a massive circumstellar matter (CSM). I discuss the members of this class, their characteristics, and their common properties. I find that fatal CEE events account for $\approx 6-10 \%$ of all CCSNe, and raise the possibility that a large fraction of peculiar and rare supernovae result from the fatal CEE. The study of these supernova progenitors as a class will bring insights on other types of supernova progenitors, as well as on the outcome of the CEE.
In the current era of time-domain astronomy, it is increasingly important to have rigorous, data driven models for classifying transients, including supernovae. We present the first application of Principal Component Analysis to the spectra of stripped-envelope core-collapse supernovae. We use one of the largest compiled optical datasets of stripped-envelope supernovae, containing 160 SNe and 1551 spectra. We find that the first 5 principal components capture 79\% of the variance of our spectral sample, which contains the main families of stripped supernovae: Ib, IIb, Ic and broad-lined Ic. We develop a quantitative, data-driven classification method using a support vector machine, and explore stripped-envelope supernovae classification as a function of phase relative to V-band maximum light. Our classification method naturally identifies "transition" supernovae and supernovae with contested labels, which we discuss in detail. We find that the stripped-envelope supernovae types are most distinguishable in the later phase ranges of $10\pm5$ days and $15\pm5$ days relative to V-band maximum, and we discuss the implications of our findings for current and future surveys such as ZTF and LSST.
The observed luminosity -- temperature relation of clusters is considerably steeper than that expected from a simple scaling relation. Although extra energy input is a likely solution, its source has not been identified. We propose intracluster supernova as a possible source, and also predict the supernova rate in intracluster space as a critical test.
We investigate the possibility to determine the fraction of compact objects in the Universe by studying gravitational lensing effects on Type Ia supernova observations. Using simulated data sets from one year of operation of the proposed dedicated supernova detection satellite SNAP, we find that it should be possible to determine the fraction of compact objects to an accuracy of < 5 %.
The supernovae Hubble diagram traces the expansion history of the universe, including the influence of dark energy. Its use to probe the cosmological model can fruitfully be guided by heuristic study of the features of the model curves. By relating these directly to the physics of the expansion we can understand simply the optimal redshift range for supernovae observations, requiring a survey depth of z=1.5-2 to distinguish evolution in dark energy properties.
Monte Carlo simulations of Galactic Supernovae are carried out to study the rate of nearby events, which may have a direct effect on Earth's ecology though ionizing radiation and cosmic ray bombardment. A nearby supernova may have left a radioactive imprint (60Fe) in recent galactic history.
We describe Brute, a code for generating synthetic spectra from 3D supernova models. It is based on a Monte Carlo implementation of the Sobolev approximation. The current version is highly parameterized, but in the future it will be extended for full NLTE spectrum modelling of supernovae.
Concluding Remarks of the 270.WE-Heraeus Seminar on Neutron Stars, Pulsars and Supernova Remnants.
The late light curves of SN 1989B exhibited an emission excess relative to other type Ia supernovae. We investigate whether this emission excess suggests light echo emission from this supernova, or rather intense background galaxy contamination at the location of the supernova. We conclude that stellar emission can better explain the late spectra, and that the emission excess is likely due to background contamination.
Optical searches can only detect supernovae with a limited amount of dust extinction. This is a severe limitation as most of the core-collapse SNe could explode inside dusty regions. We describe a few ongoing projects aimed at detecting dusty SNe at near-IR wavelengths both in ground-based and HST images and to study their properties.
Current observations stimulate the production of fully three-dimensional explosion models, which in turn motivates three-dimensional spectrum synthesis for supernova atmospheres. We briefly discuss techniques adapted to address the latter problem, and consider some fundamentals of line formation in supernovae without recourse to spherical symmetry. Direct and detailed extensions of the technique are discussed, and future work is outlined.
The number in the title is a birthday-inspired overestimate by about an order of magnitude. Nevertheless, this contribution reminds of well-known reasons that prevented straightforward explosions in many numerical supernova models. It emphasizes a separation between the two events of core collapse and supernova explosion.
This paper provides a technical description of the SuperNova Early Warning System (SNEWS), an international network of experiments with the goal of providing an early warning of a galactic supernova.
Aims: We attempt to constrain progenitors of the different types of supernovae from their spatial distributions relative to star formation regions in their host galaxies, as traced by H alpha + NII line emission.   Methods: We analyse 63 supernovae which have occurred within galaxies from our H alpha survey of the local Universe. Three statistical tests are used, based on pixel statistics, H alpha radial growth curves, and total galaxy emission-line fluxes.   Results: Many more type II supernovae come from regions of low or zero emission line flux than would be expected if the latter accurately traces high-mass star formation. We interpret this excess as a 40% `Runaway' fraction in the progenitor stars. Supernovae of types Ib and Ic do appear to trace star formation activity, with a much higher fraction coming from the centres of bright star formation regions than is the case for the type II supernovae. Type Ia supernovae overall show a weak correlation with locations of current star formation, but there is evidence that a significant minority, up to about 40%, may be linked to the young stellar population. The radial distribution of all core-collapse supernovae (types Ib, Ic and II) closely follows that of the line emission and hence star formation in the their host galaxies, apart from a central deficiency which is less marked for supernovae of types Ib and Ic than for those of type II. Core-collapse supernova rates overall are consistent with being proportional to galaxy total luminosities and star formation rates; however, within this total the type Ib and Ic supernovae show a moderate bias towards more luminous host galaxies, and type II supernovae a slight bias towards lower-luminosity hosts.
CCD BVRI photometry is presented for two type Ia supernovae 2000E and 2001V, for SN Ib 2001B and SN II-P 2001X. The parameters of light curves and absolute magnitudes at maximum light are estimated. It is shown that all four supernovae are typical for their classes considering the shape of their light curves and maximum luminosity.
This paper presents hydrodynamical and radiation-hydrodynamical simulations of the nickel bubble effect in Type Ia supernovae, comparison of results to self-similar solutions, and application to observations of Type Ia supernova remnants, with a particular emphasis on Tycho's SNR.
We present results from a systematic study of the effects of initial parameters on three-dimensional thermonuclear supernova models.
The black hole at the center of the galaxy is a powerful lens for supernova neutrinos. In the very special circumstance of a supernova near the extended line of sight from Earth to the galactic center, lensing could dramatically enhance the neutrino flux at Earth and stretch the neutrino pulse.
Supernova 1987A became a milestone in physics and astronomy. The most important things that have been learned from it, the most important problems yet to be solved and the prospects for learning important new physics from future observations of nearby supernova explosions are shortly summarized.
In this review, the effect of flavor oscillations on the neutrinos released during supernova explosion after core collapse is described. In some scenarios there are large enhancement of the number of events compared to the no oscillation case. Various other features associated with supernova neutrinos are also discussed.
The manuscript reviews progress achieved in recent years in various aspects of nuclear astrophysics, including stellar nucleosynthesis, nuclear aspects of supernova collapse and explosion, neutrino-induced reactions and their possible role in the supernova mechanism and nucleosynthesis, explosive hydrogen burning in binary systems, and finally the observation of $\gamma$-rays from supernova remnants.
This talk provides a basic introduction for students interested in the responses of detectors to solar, supernova, and other low-energy neutrino sources. Some of the nuclear physics is then applied in a discussion of nucleosynthesis within a Type II supernova, including the r-process and the neutrino process.
We investigate how the different types of supernovae are relatively affected by the metallicity of their host galaxy. We match the SAI Supernova Catalog to the SDSS-DR4 catalog of star-forming galaxies with measured metallicities. These supernova host galaxies span a range of oxygen abundance from 12 + log(O/H) = 7.9 to 9.3 (~ 0.1 to 2.7 solar) and a range in absolute magnitude from MB = -15.2 to -22.2. To reduce the various observational biases, we select a subsample of well-characterized supernovae in the redshift range from 0.01 to 0.04, which leaves us with 58 SN II, 19 Ib/c, and 38 Ia. We find strong evidence that SN Ib/c are occurring in higher-metallicity host galaxies than SN II, while we see no effect for SN Ia relative to SN II. We note some extreme and interesting supernova-host pairs, including the metal-poor (~ 1/4 solar) host of the recent SN Ia 2007bk, where the supernova was found well outside of this dwarf galaxy. To extend the luminosity range of supernova hosts to even fainter galaxies, we also match all the historical supernovae with z < 0.3 to the SDSS-DR6 sky images, resulting in 1225 matches. This allows us to identify some even more extreme cases, such as the recent SN Ic 2007bg, where the likely host of this hypernova-like event has an absolute magnitude MB ~ -12, making it one of the least-luminous supernova hosts ever observed. This low-luminosity host is certain to be very metal poor (~ 1/20 solar), and therefore this supernova is an excellent candidate for association with an off-axis GRB. The two catalogs that we have constructed are available online and will be updated regularly. Finally, we discuss various implications of our findings for understanding supernova progenitors and their host galaxies.
A recent supernova has been reported as exceeding ``the light output of an ordinary supernova by at least two orders of magnitude''. It is noted that it falls in a minor galaxy in the Perseus Cluster. Some evidence indicating a ten times closer distance for the Perseus Cluster than its redshift distance is discussed here.
The neutrino burst from a galactic supernova can help determine the neutrino mass hierarchy and $\theta_{13}$, and provide crucial information about supernova astrophysics. Here we review our current understanding of the neutrino burst, flavor conversions of these neutrinos, and model independent signatures of various neutrino mixing scenarios.
The sample of 137 low-redshift type Ia supernovae with 0.05 < z < 0.3 obtained from the SDSS-II Supernova Survey for the southern equatorial stripe of 300 square degrees is used to derive the luminosity functions of type Ia supernovae and of their host galaxies in the gri passbands. We show that the luminosity function of type Ia supernova host galaxies matches well with that of galaxies in the general field, suggesting that the occurrence of type Ia supernovae does not favour a particular type of galaxies but is predominantly proportional to the luminosity of galaxies. The only evidence that points to possible correlation between the supernova rate and star formation activity is that the supernova rate in late-type galaxies is higher than that in early-type galaxies by 31+/-35%. The sample contains 8 type Ia supernovae whose host galaxies were not identified, but it is shown that their occurrence is consistent with them occurred in low luminous galaxies beyond the survey. The luminosity function of type Ia supernovae is approximately Gaussian with the full-width half maximum being a factor of 1.4 in luminosity. The Gaussian distribution becomes tighter if the ratio of extinction to reddening, R_V, is lower than the characteristic value for the Milky Way and if luminosity is corrected for the light curve shape. The colour excess is ~0.07 mag which is significantly smaller than reddening expected for field galaxies. This colour excess does not vary with the distance of the supernovae from the centre of the host galaxy to 15 kpc. This suggests that the major part of the colour excess appears to be either intrinsic or reddening that arises in the immediate environment of supernova, rather than interstellar reddening in host galaxies.
A special class of type Ia supernovae that is not subject to ordinary and additional intragalactic gray absorption and chemical evolution has been identified. Analysis of the Hubble diagrams constructed for these supernovae confirms the accelerated expansion of the Universe irrespective of the chemical evolution and possible gray absorption in galaxies.
We propose a statistical method for decomposition of contributions to iron production from various sources: supernovae Type II and the subpopulations of supernovae Type Ia -- prompt (their progenitors are short-lived stars of ages less then $\sim$100 Myr) and tardy (whose progenitors are long-lived stars of ages $>$100 Myr). To do that, we develop a theory of oxygen and iron synthesis which takes into account the influence of spiral arms on amount of the above elements synthesized by both the supernovae Type II and prompt supernovae Ia. We solve this task without of any preliminary suppositions about the ratio among the portions of iron synthesized by the above sources.   The relative portion of iron synthesized by tardy supernovae Ia for the life-time of the Galaxy is $\sim$35 per cent (in the present ISM this portion is $\sim$50 per cent). Correspondingly, the total portion of iron supplied to the disc by supernovae Type II and prompt supernovae Ia is $\sim$65 per cent (in the present ISM this portion is $\sim$50 per cent).   The above result slightly depends on the adopted mass of oxygen and iron synthesized during one explosion of supernovae and the shape (bimodal or smooth) of the so-called Delay Time Distribution function.   The portions of iron mass distributed between the short-lived supernovae are usually as follows: depending on the ejected masses of oxygen or iron during one supernovae Type II event the relative portion of iron, supplied to the Galactic disc for its age, varies in the range 12 - 32 per cent (in the present ISM 9-25 per cent); the portion supplied by prompt supernovae Ia to the Galactic disc is 33 - 53 per cent (in ISM 26 - 42 per cent).
Fast-spinning strongly magnetized newborn neutron stars, including nascent magnetars, are popularly implemented as the engine of luminous stellar explosions. Here, we consider the scenario that they power various stripped-envelope supernovae, not only super-luminous supernovae Ic but also broad-line supernovae Ibc and possibly some ordinary supernovae Ibc. This scenario is also motivated by the hypothesis that Galactic magnetars largely originate from fast-spinning neutron stars as remnants of stripped-envelope supernovae. By consistently modeling the energy injection from magnetized wind and Ni decay, we show that proto-neutron stars with >~ 10 ms rotation and B_dip >~ 5 x 10^14 G can be harbored in ordinary supernovae Ibc. On the other hand, millisecond proto-neuton stars can solely power broad-line supernovae Ibc if they are born with poloidal magnetic field of B_dip >~ 5 x 10^14 G, and superluminous supernovae Ic with B_dip >~ 10^13 G. Then, we study how multi-messenger emission can be used to discriminate such pulsar-driven supernova models from other competitive scenarios. First, high-energy x-ray and gamma-ray emission from embryonic pulsar wind nebulae is a promising smoking gun of the underlying newborn pulsar wind. Follow-up observations of stripped-envelope supernovae using NuSTAR ~ 50-100 days after the explosion is strongly encouraged for nearby objects. We also discuss possible effects of gravitational-waves on the spin-down of proto-neutron stars. If millisecond proto-neutron stars with B_dip <~ a few x 10^13 G emit gravitational waves through e.g., non-axisymmetric rotation deformed by the inner toroidal fields of B_t >~ 10^16 G, the gravitational wave signal can be detectable from ordinary supernova Ibc in the Virgo cluster by Advanced LIGO, Advanced Virgo, and KAGRA.
We investigate light-curve and spectral properties of ultra-stripped core-collapse supernovae. Ultra-stripped supernovae are the explosions of heavily stripped massive stars which lost their envelopes via binary interactions with a compact companion star. They eject only ~ 0.1 Msun and may be the main way to form double neutron-star systems which eventually merge emitting strong gravitational waves. We follow the evolution of an ultra-stripped supernova progenitor until iron core collapse and perform explosive nucleosynthesis calculations. We then synthesize light curves and spectra of ultra-stripped supernovae using the nucleosynthesis results and present their expected properties. Ultra-stripped supernovae synthesize ~ 0.01 Msun of radioactive 56Ni, and their typical peak luminosity is around 1e42 erg/s or -16 mag. Their typical rise time is 5 - 10 days. Comparing synthesized and observed spectra, we find that SN 2005ek, some of the so-called calcium-rich gap transients, and SN 2010X may be related to ultra-stripped supernovae. If these supernovae are actually ultra-stripped supernovae, their event rate is expected to be about 1 per cent of core-collapse supernovae. Comparing the double neutron-star merger rate obtained by future gravitational-wave observations and the ultra-stripped supernova rate obtained by optical transient surveys identified with our synthesized light-curve and spectral models, we will be able to judge whether ultra-stripped supernovae are actually a major contributor to the binary neutron star population and provide constraints on binary stellar evolution.
Direct measurements of the core-collapse supernova rate in the redshift range 0<z 1 appear to be about a factor of two smaller than the rate inferred from the measured cosmic massive-star formation rate (SFR). We explore the possibility that one could clarify the source of this "supernova rate problem" by detecting the energy spectrum of supernova relic neutrinos with a next generation detector like Hyper-Kamiokande. We make an alternative compilation of the SFR data. We show that by only including published SFR data for which the dust obscuration has been directly determined, the ratio of the observed massive SFR to the observed supernova rate has large uncertainties$\sim 1.8^{+1.6}_{-0.6}$, and is statistically consistent with no supernova rate problem. If we consider that a significant fraction of massive stars end their lives as faint ONeMg SNe or as failed SNe, then the ratio reduces to $\sim 1.1^{+1.0}_{-0.4}$ and the rate problem is solved. We study the sources of uncertainty involved in estimates of the neutrino detection rate and analyze whether the spectrum of relic neutrinos can be used to independently identify the existence of a supernova rate problem and its source. We consider an ensemble of published and unpublished neutrino luminosities and temperatures from core collapse supernova simulation models. We illustrate how the spectrum of detector events might be used to constrain the average neutrino temperature and SN models. We study the effects of neutrino oscillations on the detected neutrino spectrum and also analyze a possible enhanced contribution from failed supernovae. We conclude that it might be possible to measure the neutrino temperature, neutrino oscillations, the EOS, and confirm this source of missing luminous supernovae.
We present the properties of the supernova SN 1995ah discovered in a Blue Compact Dwarf galaxy (BCD) around 10 days after the maximum. This is the first supernova event observed in a BCD. The photometric and spectroscopic data suggest that SN 1995ah is a Type II supernova and could belong to the rare Bright SNII Linear subclass, for which <M(R)>~<M(B)>=-18.9+-0.6 at maximum light.
While low-z Type Ia supernovae are used to measure the present rate of expansion of the Universe, high-z Type Ia measure its variation due to the cosmic matter-energy content. Results from those determinations imply a low matter density Universe with a non-zero cosmological constant (vacuum-energy component). The expansion rate of the Universe accelerates, according to these determinations. The validity of the Type Ia supernova approach for this cosmological research is addressed. An account is given of additional prospects to further investigate through supernovae what the Universe is made of. Those attempts range from constraining the large scale dark matter distribution to further test and interpret the presence of a vacuum energy component.
The interaction between the ejecta from Supernova 1987A and surrounding material is producing steadily brightening radio and X-ray emission. The new-born supernova remnant has been significantly decelerated by this interaction, while its morphology reflects the axisymmetric nature of the progenitor wind.
We present results from a spectropolarimetric survey of young supernovae completed at the Keck Observatory, including at least one example from each of the major supernova types: Ia (1997dt), Ib (1998T, 1997dq), Ib/c-pec (1997ef), IIn (1997eg), and II-P (1997ds). All objects show evidence for intrinsic polarization, suggesting that asphericity may be a common feature in young supernova atmospheres.
We review the basic properties of the different supernova types identified in the current taxonomy, with emphasis on the more recent developments. To help orienting in the variegate zoo, the optical photometric and spectroscopic properties of the different supernova types are presented in a number of summary figures. We also report the latest estimates of the supernova rates and stress the need for a dedicated effort to measure SN rates at high redshift.
This brief review of recent X-ray observations of young supernova remnants highlights results obtained by the Chandra and XMM Newton Observatories since their launch last year. Their impressive capabilities are illustrated by results for spectral imaging, and for spatially resolved spectroscopy that isolates emission from individual ejecta knots and from the forward shock. I also review X-ray dynamical studies of supernova remnants, which should undergo significant advances during this new era.
We show that as a Type II supernova shock breaks out of its progenitor star, it becomes collisionless and may accelerate protons to energies >10 TeV. Inelastic nuclear collisions of these protons produce a ~1 hr long flash of TeV neutrinos and 10 GeV photons, about 10 hr after the thermal (10 MeV) neutrino burst from the cooling neutron star. A Galactic supernova in a red supergiant star would produce a photon and neutrino flux of ~10^{-4} erg/cm^2 s. A km^2 neutrino detector will detect ~100 muons, thus allowing to constrain both supernova models and neutrino properties.
Supernova flux and polarization spectra bring vital information on the geometry, physical conditions, and composition structure of the ejected matter. For some supernovae the circumstellar matter is also probed by the observed spectra. Some of this information can be inferred directly from the observed line profiles and fluxes, but because of the Doppler broadening and severe line blending, interpretation often involves the use of synthetic spectra. The emphasis in this Chapter is on recent results obtained with the help of synthetic spectra.
We use the fact that a Type Ia supernova has been serendipitously discovered near the jet of the active galaxy 3C 78 to examine the question of whether jets can enhance accretion onto white dwarfs. One interesting outcome of such a jet-induced accretion process is an enhanced rate of novae in the vicinity of jets. We present results of observations of the jet in M87 which appear to have indeed discovered 11 novae in close proximity to the jet. We show that a confirmation of the relation between jets and novae and Type Ia supernovae can finally identify the elusive progenitors of Type Ia supernovae.
Neutrino-matter interaction rates are central to the core collapse phenomenon and, perhaps, to the viability of the mechanism of core-collapse supernova explosions. In this paper we catalog and discuss the major neutrino scattering, absorption, and production processes that together influence the outcome of core collapse and the cooling of protoneutron stars. These are the essential inputs into the codes used to simulate the supernova phenomenon and an understanding of these processes is a prerequisite to continuing progress in supernova theory.
We discuss a concept of off-centred cavity supernova explosion as applied to neutron star/supernova remnant associations and show how this concept could be used to preclude the anti-humane decapitating the Duck (G5.4-1.2 + G5.27-0.9) and dismembering the Swan (Cygnus Loop), as well as to search for a stellar remnant associated with the supernova remnant RCW86.
I use the largest available sample of Type II plateau supernovae to examine the previously reported luminosity-velocity relation. This study confirms such relation which permits one to standardize the luminosities of these objects from a spectroscopic measurement of their envelope velocities, and use them as extragalactic distance indicators. The "standard candle method" (SCM) yields a Hubble diagram with a dispersion of 0.3 mag, which implies that the SCM produces distances with a precision of 15%. Using two nearby supernovae with Cepheid distances I find Ho=81+/-10 km/s/Mpc, which compares with Ho=74 derived from Type Ia supernovae.
Observations of late-time optical bumps have been reported for several GRBs. The timescale for such bumps, and colors of such when available, find a natural explanation as due to associated supernovae. Ground-based and HST observations of the afterglow and bump of GRB 011121, in particular, place the strongest constraints yet on the physical nature of the supernova and any alternative explanations, such as supranovae or dust echoes. I summarize the search for underlying bumps in other GRBs and make the case for the supernova hypothesis in light of observed bumps and bump non-detections (e.g., GRB 010921).
The recent detection of H-alpha emission in the supernova Type Ia SN 2002ic could be taken to mean that the elusive progenitor systems of Type Ia supernovae have finally been identified. At first glance, the observation appears to support a single-degenerate scenario, in which the white dwarf accretes from a normal companion. In this Letter we show that the opposite may be true, and the observations may support the merger of two white dwarfs as the cause for Type Ia supernovae.
We present spectroscopic and photometric data of a sample of Type II plateau Supernovae, covering a wide range of properties, from the $^{56}$Ni rich, high luminosity events (e.g. SN 1992am) to the low-luminosity, $^{56}$Ni poor SNe (e.g. SN 1997D). We provide an observational framework to analyze correlations among observational data, physical parameters and progenitors characteristics of Type II Supernovae.
Results of 2D simulations of the magnetorotational mechanism of supernova type II are presented. Amplification of toroidal magnetic field of the star due to differential rotation of the star leads to the transformation of the rotational (gravitational) energy to the energy of the supernova explosion. In our simulation the energy of the explosion is $1.12 \cdot 10^{51}erg$. The explosion ejects about $0.11 M_\odot$.
The discovery of SN 2002ic and subsequent spectroscopic studies have led to the surprising finding that SN 2002ic is a Type Ia supernova with strong ejecta-circumstellar interaction. Here we show that nearly 1 year after the explosion the supernova has become fainter overall, but the H$\alpha$ emission has brightened and broadened dramatically compared to earlier observations. We have obtained spectropolarimetry data which show that the hydrogen-rich matter is highly aspherically distributed. These observations suggest that the supernova exploded inside a dense, clumpy, disk-like circumstellar environment.
Core-collapse supernovae are dramatic events with a rich phenomenology, including gravitational radiation. Simulations of these events in multiple spatial dimensions with energy- and angle-dependent neutrino transport are still in their infancy. Core collapse and bounce in a supernova in our galaxy may well be visible by first-generation LIGO, but detailed understanding waits on improvements in modeling both stellar progenitors and the supernova process.
Supernovae Ia (SNe Ia) light curves have been used to prove the universe is expanding. As standard candles, SNe Ia appear to indicate the rate of expansion has increased in the past and is now decreasing. This independent evaluation of SNe Ia light curves demonstrates a Malmquist Type II bias exists in the body of supernova data. If this bias is properly addressed, there is very little budget for time dilation in the light curves of supernova. A non-relativistic distance modulus is proposed, which is based on the predictable attenuation of light by an intergalactic CREIL (Coherent Raman Effects on Incoherent Light) radiation transfer functions.
Neutrinos dominate the energetics of core-collapse supernovae, and are believed to play an important role in driving the explosion. The development of a spatially multidimensional neutrino radiative transfer code is a key part of the Terascale Supernova Initiative, a multi-year effort aimed at understanding the supernova explosion mechanism through supercomputer simulations. I will describe the conservative formulations of general relativistic radiative transfer we have developed for this application, and the algorithm we are implementing in our parallel code.
We present preliminary results of the observational campaign on SN 2002er carried out by the European Supernova Collaboration (ESC). For this supernova the optical coverage from epochs -11 days to +50 days is excellent, both in imaging and spectroscopy. The extinction deduced from the photometry is E(B-V)=0.35, while Deltam15=1.31. In general SN 2002er behaves like a "normal" type Ia supernova, very similar to SN 1996X.
A simple description of core-collapse supernovae is given. Properties of the neutrino-driven wind, neutrino fluxes and luminosities, reaction rates, and the equilibrium electron fraction in supernova environments are discussed. Neutrino mixing and neutrino interactions that are relevant to core-collapse supernovae are briefly reviewed. The values of electron fraction under several evolution scenarios that may impact rapid neutron capture process (r-process) nucleosynthesis are calculated.
Recent observations of sub-millimeter continuum emission toward supernova remnants (SNR) have raised the question of whether such emission is caused by dust within the SNR and thus produced by the supernova itself or along the line-of-sight. The importance of the present work is to establish evidence for the production of large amounts of dust in supernovae. The best tests can be made for young supernovae in our galaxy. Cassiopeia A is the best candidate for a measurement.
We discuss the host galaxy morphology of the 8 SNe discovered as a part of the International Time Programme (ITP) project ``Omega and Lambda from Supernovae, and the Physics of Supernovae Explosions'' at the European Northern Observatory (ENO). Identification of the SN host galaxy types was done exploiting both imaging and spectroscopy. A peculiar SNIa at z= 0.033 is found in a spiral galaxy, as most other SNeIa with z between 0.1 and 0.4. A complete account of these studies will be given elsewhere.
Supernovae (SN) and supernova remnants (SNR) have key roles in galaxies, but their physical descriptions is still incomplete. Thus, it is of interest to study neutrino radiation to understand SN and SNR better. We will discuss: (1) The ~10 MeV thermal neutrinos that arise from core collapse SN, that were observed for SN1987A, and can be seen with several existing or planned experiments. (2) The 10-100 TeV neutrinos expected from galactic SNR (in particular from RX J1713.7-3946) targets of future underwater neutrino telescopes.
We present the effects of ellipticity of matter distribution in massive halos on the observation of supernovae. A pseudo elliptical Navarro-Frenk-White (NFW) mass model is used to calculate the introduced gain factors and observation rates of type Ia supernovae due to the strong lensing. We investigate how and to what extent the ellipticity in mass distribution of the deflecting halos can affect surveys looking for cosmologically distant supernovae. We use halo masses of $1.0 \times 10^{12} h^{-1} M_{\odot}$ and $1.0 \times 10^{14} h^{-1} M_{\odot}$ at redshifts $z_{d}=0.2$, $z_{d}=0.5$, and $z_{d}=1.0$, with ellipticities of up to $\epsilon=0.2$.
We would like to discuss prospects for neutrino observations of the core-collapse supernova progenitor during neutrino-cooled stage. We will present new theoretical results on thermal neutrino and antineutrino spectra produced deep inside the pre-supernova core. Three competing processes: pair-, photo and plasma-neutrino production, are taken into account. The results will be used to estimate signal in existing and future neutrino detectors. Chance for supernova prediction is estimated, with possible aid to core-collapse neutrino and gravitational wave detectors in the form of early warning.
The quality of supernova data will dramatically increase in the next few years by new experiments that will add high-redshift supernova to the currently known ones. In order to use this new data to discriminate between different dark energy models, the statefinder diagnostic was suggested and investigated by Alam et al. in the light of the proposed SuperNova Acceleration Probe (SNAP) satellite. By making use of the same procedure presented by these authors, we compare their analyzes with ours, which shows a more realistic supernovae redshift distribution and do not assume that the intercept is known. We also analyzed the behavior of the statefinder pair {r,s} and the alternative pair {s,q} in the presence of offset errors.
The large-volume liquid-scintillator detector LENA (Low Energy Neutrino Astronomy) will provide high-grade background discrimination and enable the detection of diffuse supernova neutrinos (DSN) in an almost background-free energy window from ~10 to 25 MeV. Within ten years of exposure, it will be possible to derive significant constraints on both core-collapse supernova models and the supernova rate in the near universe up to redshifts z<2.
The coherent contribution of all neutrons in neutrino nucleus scattering due to the neutral current offers a realistic prospect of detecting supernova neutrinos. As a matter of fact. for a typical supernova at 10 kpc, about 1000 events are expected usinga spherical gaseous detector of radius 4 m andemploying Xe gas at a pressure of 10 Atm. We propose a world wide network of several such simple, stable and low cost supernova detectors with a running time of a few centuries.
The observation of the $\bar{\nu}_e$ energy spectrum from a supernova burst can provide constraints on neutrino oscillations. We derive formulas for adiabatic oscillations of supernova antineutrinos for a variety of 3- and 4-neutrino mixing schemes and mass hierarchies which are consistent with the LSND evidence for $\bar{\nu}_{\mu}\to \bar{\nu}_e$ oscillations.   Finally, we explore the constraints on these models and LSND given by the supernova SN1987A $\bar{\nu}_e$'s observed by the Kamiokande-2 and IMB-3 detectors.
We study type II supernova signatures of neutrino mass generation via symmetry breaking at a scale in the range from keV to MeV. The scalar responsible for symmetry breaking can be thermalized in the supernova core and restore the symmetry. The neutrinos from scalar decays have about half the average energy of thermal neutrinos and are Bose-Einstein distributed. We find that, even without a detailed knowledge of the supernova parameters, a discovery is well within reach at Super-Kamiokande.
We show that fitting linear combinations of low-energy beta-beam spectra to supernova-neutrino energy-distributions reconstructs the response of a nuclear target to a supernova flux in a very accurate way. This allows one to make direct predictions about the supernova-neutrino signal in a terrestrial neutrino detector.
Free electrons deplete photons from type Ia supernovae through the (inverse) Compton scattering. This Compton dimming increases with redshift and reaches 0.004 mag at $z=1$ and 0.01 mag at $z=2$. Although far from sufficient to invalidate the existence of dark energy, it can bias constraint on dark energy at a level non-negligible for future supernova surveys. This effect is correctable and should be incorporated in supernova analysis. The Compton dimming has similar impact on cosmology based on gamma ray bursts as standard candles.
I study the diffuse flux of electron antineutrinos from stellar collapses with direct black hole formation (failed supernovae). This flux is more energetic than that from successful supernovae, and therefore it might contribute substantially to the total diffuse flux above realistic detection thresholds. The total flux might be considerably higher than previously thought, and approach the sensitivity of SuperKamiokande. For more conservative values of the parameters, the flux from failed supernovae dominates for antineutrino energies above 30-45 MeV, with potential to give an observable spectral distortion at Megaton detectors.
This is a brief sketch of the use of supernovae to measure cosmological parameters. It traces the early work, the events surrounding the discovery and verification of cosmic acceleration using SN Ia, and the efforts today to make sound inferences about the nature of dark energy. The prospects for minimizing systematics by using near-infrared observations in the supernova restframe are emphasized. This could be an important point in the design of a JDEM that employs supernovae to measure the history of cosmic expansion.
The light curve of a type Ia supernova decays at a rate set by the beta-decay lifetimes of the Ni-56 and Co-56 produced in the explosion. This makes such a light curve sensitive to the value of the Fermi constant G_F at the time of the supernova. Using data from the CfA Supernova Archive, we measure the dependence of the light curve decay rate on redshift and place a bound on the time variation of G_F of |(dG_F/dt)/G_F| < 10^(-9) / y.
We discuss the recent progress in our understanding of neutrino flavour conversion in core-collapse supernovae and focus on the effects coming from the neutrino-neutrino interaction. The latter has been shown to engender new phenomena, modifying significantly the neutrino fluxes and supernova observations. In particular, we make the link between the spectral split and the magnetic resonance phenomenon. Moreover, recent investigations have demonstrated the existence of leptonic CP violation effects on the supernova neutrino fluxes. We summarize these findings.
Using our new general-relativistic, radiation hydrodynamics, Lagrangian code, we computed a rather extended grid of hydrogen-rich core-collapse supernova (CC-SN) models and explored the potentials of their "standardization" as distance indicators. We discuss the properties of some calibrations previously reported in the literature and present new correlations based on the behavior of the light curve, that can be employed for calibrating hydrogen-rich CC-SNe using only photometric data.
In this review I summarize the observational attempts done so far to unveil the nature of the progenitor system/s of Type Ia Supernovae. In particular, I focus on the most recent developments that followed the alleged detection of circumstellar material around a few events, and on the link this possibly establishes with recurrent novae. In this framework, I then discuss the case of RS Oph, what we know of its circumstellar environment, and what this is telling us about its supposed connection to Type Ia supernova explosions.
The rareness of nearby supernovae ensures particular value to the historic records for determination of their light curves. We provide the translation of 13th century Armenian chronicle of Hetum, which by its unexpected association to Cronaca Rampona and other chronicles can influence the debates whether there are reliable European records of the supernova of 1054 AD, as well as the analysis of the records vs the conjunction with the Moon and their role in assigning of the Type I or II to that supernova.
Core collapse supernovae are unique laboratories to study many aspects of neutrino physics. The vicinity of the proto-neutron star in a core-collapse supernova is characterized by large matter and neutrino densities. A salient feature of this region is the impact of neutrino-neutrino interactions. Properties of the ensuing non-linear many-neutrino system are examined with a particular emphasis on its collective behavior and its symmetries. The impact of neutrino properties and interactions on the r-process nucleosynthesis that may take place in the supernova environment is discussed.
An all-sky monitor with nuclear imaging spectroscopy is a promising tool for the systematic study of supernova explosions. In particular, progenitor scenarios of type-Ia supernovae, which are not yet well understood, can be resolved using light curves in the nuclear gamma-ray band. Here we report an expected result of an all-sky monitor with imaging spectroscopy using electron-tracking Compton camera, which will enable us to observe nuclear gamma-ray lines from type-Ia supernovae.
Recent papers have shown that a small systematic redshift shift ($\Delta z\sim 10^{-5}$) in measurements of type Ia supernovae can cause a significant bias ($\sim$1\%) in the recovery of cosmological parameters. Such a redshift shift could be caused, for example, by a gravitational redshift due to the density of our local environment. The sensitivity of supernova data to redshift shifts means supernovae make excellent probes of inhomogeneities. We therefore invert the analysis, and try to diagnose the nature of our local gravitational environment by fitting for $\Delta z$ as an extra free parameter alongside the usual cosmological parameters.
Evidence has mounted that Type Ia and core-collapse (CC) supernovae (SNe) can have substantial deviations from spherical symmetry; one such piece of evidence is the complex morphologies of supernova remnants (SNRs). However, the relative role of the explosion geometry and the environment in shaping SNRs remains an outstanding question. Recently, we have developed techniques to quantify the morphologies of SNRs, and we have applied these methods to the extensive X-ray and infrared archival images available of Milky Way and Magellanic Cloud SNRs. In this proceeding, we highlight some results from these studies, with particular emphasis on SNR asymmetries and whether they arise from "nature" versus "nurture".
The spectrum of a supernova is a summation of numerous overlapping atomic line signatures. Consequently, empirical measurements are limited in application when compound features are assumed to be due to one or two spectral lines. Here I address matters of spectroscopic boundaries between normal and peculiar type I supernovae using multi-component empirical metrics. I discuss some obstacles faced when using supernova spectra to pair model with data and I demonstrate how spectrum synthesis can benefit from fairly complete observational coverage in wavelength and time.
We present gravitational wave and neutrino signatures obtained in our first principle 3D core-collapse supernova simulation of 15M non-rotating progenitor with Chimera code. Observations of neutrinos emitted by the forming neutron star, and gravitational waves, which are produced by hydrodynamic instabilities is the only way to get direct information about the supernova engine. Both GW and neutrino signals show different phases of supernova evolution.
The conventional neutrino transport theory for core-collapse supernovae misses one key property of neutrinos: the left-handedness. The chirality of neutrinos modifies the hydrodynamic behavior at the macroscopic scale and leads to topological transport phenomena. We argue that such transport phenomena should play important roles in the evolution of core-collapse supernovae, and, in particular, lead to a tendency toward the inverse energy cascade from small to larger scales, which may be relevant to the origin of the supernova explosion.
We constructed 70 SuperNova IDentification (SNID; Blondin & Tonry 2007) supernova (SN) templates using 640 spectra of stripped-envelope core-collapse SNe (SESNe) published by Modjaz et al. (2014). Fifty-six SN templates which are constructed from 458 spectra are brand new, increasing the number of SESNe and the number of SESNe spectra in the current SNID database by a factor of 2.6 and 2.0, respectively. We also made some type and phase refinements to templates in the current SNID database.
The debate on the nature of the gamma-ray emission from young supernova remnants is still open. Ascribing such emission to hadronic rather than leptonic processes would provide an evidence for the acceleration of protons and nuclei, and this fact would fit with the very popular (but not proven) paradigm that supernova remnants are the sources of Galactic cosmic rays. Here, we discuss this issue with a particular focus on the best studied gamma-ray-bright supernova remnant: RX~J1713.7-3946.
In the coming LSST era, we will observe $\mathcal{O}(100)$ of lensed supernovae (SNe). In this paper, we investigate possibility for predicting time and sky position of a supernova using strong lensing. We find that it will be possible to predict the time and position of the fourth image of SNe which produce four images by strong lensing, with combined information from the three previous images. It is useful to perform multi-messenger observations of the very early phase of supernova explosions including the shock breakout.
The Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) is a 40-kton underground liquid argon time-projection-chamber detector that will have unique sensitivity to the electron flavor component of a core-collapse supernova neutrino burst. We present expected capabilities of DUNE for measurements of neutrinos in the few-tens-of-MeV range relevant for supernova detection and the corresponding sensitivities to neutrino physics and supernova astrophysics. Recent progress and some outstanding issues will be highlighted.
Large scale astronomical surveys are going wider and deeper than ever before. However, astronomers, cosmologists and theorists continue to face the perennial issue that their data sets are often incomplete in magnitude space and must be carefully treated in order to avoid Malmquist bias, especially in the field of supernova cosmology. Historically, cosmological parameter inference in supernova cosmology was done using $\chi^2$ methodology; however, recent years have seen a rise in the use of Bayesian Hierarchical Models. In this paper we develop a Bayesian Hierarchical methodology to account for magnitude limited surveys and present a specific application to cosmological parameter inference and model selection in supernova cosmology.
This letter argues that gravitational waves, generated in core-collapse of a pre-supernova star, can produce electromagnetic radiation as the wave propagates outside the collapsing core. While the energy of this co-produced electromagnetic radiation is orders of magnitude smaller than the gravitational radiation, the electromagnetic power is shown to be sufficient to re-ignite fusion outside of the iron core. The re-ignition of fusion in the silicon layer of the collapsing star could provide the means to prevent the supernova from stalling. We conclude that this production of electromagnetic radiation via the gravitational wave should be included in computer simulations which model core-collapse supernova.
We present a new measurement of the volumetric rate of Type Ia supernova up to a redshift of 1.7, using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) GOODS data combined with an additional HST dataset covering the North GOODS field collected in 2004. We employ a novel technique that does not require spectroscopic data for identifying Type Ia supernovae (although spectroscopic measurements of redshifts are used for over half the sample); instead we employ a Bayesian approach using only photometric data to calculate the probability that an object is a Type Ia supernova. This Bayesian technique can easily be modified to incorporate improved priors on supernova properties, and it is well-suited for future high-statistics supernovae searches in which spectroscopic follow up of all candidates will be impractical. Here, the method is validated on both ground- and space-based supernova data having some spectroscopic follow up. We combine our volumetric rate measurements with low redshift supernova data, and fit to a number of possible models for the evolution of the Type Ia supernova rate as a function of redshift. The data do not distinguish between a flat rate at redshift > 0.5 and a previously proposed model, in which the Type Ia rate peaks at redshift >1 due to a significant delay from star-formation to the supernova explosion. Except for the highest redshifts, where the signal to noise ratio is generally too low to apply this technique, this approach yields smaller or comparable uncertainties than previous work.
The cumulative (anti)neutrino production from all core-collapse supernovae within our cosmic horizon gives rise to the diffuse supernova neutrino background (DSNB), which is on the verge of detectability. The observed flux depends on supernova physics, but also on the cosmic history of supernova explosions; currently, the cosmic supernova rate introduces a substantial (+/-40%) uncertainty, largely through its absolute normalization. However, a new class of wide-field, repeated-scan (synoptic) optical sky surveys is coming online, and will map the sky in the time domain with unprecedented depth, completeness, and dynamic range. We show that these surveys will obtain the cosmic supernova rate by direct counting, in an unbiased way and with high statistics, and thus will allow for precise predictions of the DSNB. Upcoming sky surveys will substantially reduce the uncertainties in the DSNB source history to an anticipated +/-5% that is dominated by systematics, so that the observed high-energy flux thus will test supernova neutrino physics. The portion of the universe (z < 1) accessible to upcoming sky surveys includes the progenitors of a large fraction (~ 87%) of the expected 10-26 MeV DSNB event rate. We show that precision determination of the (optically detected) cosmic supernova history will also make the DSNB into a strong probe of an extra flux of neutrinos from optically invisible supernovae, which may be unseen either due to unexpected large dust obscuration in host galaxies, or because some core-collapse events proceed directly to black hole formation and fail to give an optical outburst.
The current supernova detection technique used in IceCube relies on the sudden deviation of the summed photomultiplier noise rate from its nominal value during the neutrino burst, making IceCube a $\approx 3$ Megaton effective detection volume - class supernova detector. While galactic supernovae can be resolved with this technique, the supernova neutrino emission spectrum remains unconstrained and thus presents a limited potential for the topics related to supernova core collapse models.   The paper elaborates analytically on the capabilities of IceCube to detect supernovae through the analysis of hits in the detector correlated in space and time. These arise from supernova neutrinos interacting in the instrumented detector volume along single strings. Although the effective detection volume for such coincidental hits is much smaller ($\gtrsim 35\,$kton, about the scale of SuperK), a wealth of information is obtained due to the comparatively low coincidental noise rate. We demonstrate that a neutrino flux from a core collapse supernova will produce a signature enabling the resolution of rough spectral features and, in the case of a strong signal, providing indication on its location.   We further discuss the enhanced potential of a rather modest detector extension, a denser array in the center of IceCube, within our one dimensional analytic calculation framework. Such an extension would enable the exploration of the neutrino sky above a few GeV and the detection of supernovae up to a few 100's of kilo parsec. However, a $3-4\,$Mpc detection distance, necessary for routine supernova detection, demands a significant increase of the effective detection volume and can be obtained only with a more ambitious instrument, particularly the boosting of sensor parameters such as the quantum efficiency and light collection area.
We present a review of a broad selection of nuclear matter equations of state (EOSs) applicable in core-collapse supernova studies. The large variety of nuclear matter properties, such as the symmetry energy, which are covered by these EOSs leads to distinct outcomes in supernova simulations. Many of the currently used EOS models can be ruled out by nuclear experiments, nuclear many-body calculations, and observations of neutron stars. In particular the two classical supernova EOS describe neutron matter poorly. Nevertheless, we explore their impact in supernova simulations since they are commonly used in astrophysics. They serve as extremely soft and stiff representative nuclear models. The corresponding supernova simulations represent two extreme cases, e.g., with respect to the protoneutron star (PNS) compactness and shock evolution. Moreover, in multi-dimensional supernova simulations EOS differences have a strong effect on the explosion dynamics. Because of the extreme behaviors of the classical supernova EOSs we also include DD2, a relativistic mean field EOS with density-dependent couplings, which is in satisfactory agreement with many current nuclear and observational constraints. This is the first time that DD2 is applied to supernova simulations and compared with the classical supernova EOS. We find that the overall behaviour of the latter EOS in supernova simulations lies in between the two extreme classical EOSs. As pointed out in previous studies, we confirm the impact of the symmetry energy on the electron fraction. Furthermore, we find that the symmetry energy becomes less important during the post bounce evolution, where conversely the symmetric part of the EOS becomes increasingly dominating, which is related to the high temperatures obtained. Moreover, we study the possible impact of quark matter at high densities and light nuclear clusters at low and intermediate dens
Two main physical mechanisms are used to explain supernova explosions: thermonuclear explosion of a white dwarf(Type Ia) and core collapse of a massive star (Type II and Type Ib/Ic). Type Ia supernovae serve as distance indicators that led to the discovery of the accelerating expansion of the Universe. The exact nature of their progenitor systems however remain unclear. Radio emission from the interaction between the explosion shock front and its surrounding CSM or ISM provides an important probe into the progenitor star's last evolutionary stage. No radio emission has yet been detected from Type Ia supernovae by current telescopes. The SKA will hopefully detect radio emission from Type Ia supernovae due to its much better sensitivity and resolution. There is a 'supernovae rate problem' for the core collapse supernovae because the optically dim ones are missed due to being intrinsically faint and/or due to dust obscuration. A number of dust-enshrouded optically hidden supernovae should be discovered via SKA1-MID/survey, especially for those located in the innermost regions of their host galaxies. Meanwhile, the detection of intrinsically dim SNe will also benefit from SKA1. The detection rate will provide unique information about the current star formation rate and the initial mass function. A supernova explosion triggers a shock wave which expels and heats the surrounding CSM and ISM, and forms a supernova remnant (SNR). It is expected that more SNRs will be discovered by the SKA. This may decrease the discrepancy between the expected and observed numbers of SNRs. Several SNRs have been confirmed to accelerate protons, the main component of cosmic rays, to very high energy by their shocks. This brings us hope of solving the Galactic cosmic ray origin's puzzle by combining the low frequency (SKA) and very high frequency (Cherenkov Telescope Array: CTA) bands' observations of SNRs.
The element abundance ratios of four low-mass stars with extremely low metallicities indicate that the gas out of which the stars formed was enriched in each case by at most a few, and potentially only one low-energy, supernova. Such supernovae yield large quantities of light elements such as carbon but very little iron. The dominance of low-energy supernovae is surprising, because it has been expected that the first stars were extremely massive, and that they disintegrated in pair-instability explosions that would rapidly enrich galaxies in iron. What has remained unclear is the yield of iron from the first supernovae, because hitherto no star is unambiguously interpreted as encapsulating the yield of a single supernova. Here we report the optical spectrum of SMSS J031300.36- 670839.3, which shows no evidence of iron (with an upper limit of 10^-7.1 times solar abundance). Based on a comparison of its abundance pattern with those of models, we conclude that the star was seeded with material from a single supernova with an original mass of ~60 Mo (and that the supernova left behind a black hole). Taken together with the previously mentioned low-metallicity stars, we conclude that low-energy supernovae were common in the early Universe, and that such supernovae yield light element enrichment with insignificant iron. Reduced stellar feedback both chemically and mechanically from low-energy supernovae would have enabled first-generation stars to form over an extended period. We speculate that such stars may perhaps have had an important role in the epoch of cosmic reionization and the chemical evolution of early galaxies.
We introduce a method for identifying "twin" Type Ia supernovae, and using them to improve distance measurements. This novel approach to Type Ia supernova standardization is made possible by spectrophotometric time series observations from the Nearby Supernova Factory (SNfactory). We begin with a well-measured set of supernovae, find pairs whose spectra match well across the entire optical window, and then test whether this leads to a smaller dispersion in their absolute brightnesses. This analysis is completed in a blinded fashion, ensuring that decisions made in implementing the method do not inadvertently bias the result. We find that pairs of supernovae with more closely matched spectra indeed have reduced brightness dispersion. We are able to standardize this initial set of SNfactory supernovae to 0.083 +/- 0.012 magnitudes, implying a dispersion of 0.072 +/- 0.010 magnitudes in the absence of peculiar velocities. We estimate that with larger numbers of comparison SNe, e.g, using the final SNfactory spectrophotometric dataset as a reference, this method will be capable of standardizing high-redshift supernovae to within 0.06-0.07 magnitudes. These results imply that at least 3/4 of the variance in Hubble residuals in current supernova cosmology analyses is due to previously unaccounted-for astrophysical differences among the supernovae
Long duration gamma-ray bursts are a rare subclass of stripped-envelope core-collapse supernovae that launch collimated relativistic outflows (jets). All gamma-ray-burst-associated supernovae are spectroscopically of Type Ic with broad lines, but the fraction of broad-lined Type Ic supernovae harboring low-luminosity gamma-ray-burst remains largely unconstrained. Some supernovae should be accompanied by off-axis $\gamma$-ray burst jets that remain invisible initially, but then emerge as strong radio sources (as the jets decelerate). However, this critical prediction of the jet model for gamma-ray bursts has yet to be verified observationally. Here, we present K. G. Jansky Very Large Array observations of 15 broad-lined supernovae of Type Ic discovered by the Palomar Transient Factory in an untargeted manner. Most of the supernovae in our sample exclude radio emission observationally similar to that of the radio-loud, relativistic SN\,1998bw. We constrain the fraction of 1998bw-like broad-lined Type Ic supernovae to be <~ 41% (99.865% confidence). Most of the events in our sample also exclude off-axis jets similar to GRB 031203 and GRB 030329, but we cannot rule out off-axis gamma-ray-bursts expanding in a low-density wind environment. Three supernovae in our sample are detected in the radio. PTF11qcj and PTF14dby show late-time radio emission with average ejecta speeds of ~(0.3-0.4)c, on the dividing line between relativistic and "ordinary" supernovae. The speed of PTF11cmh radio ejecta is poorly constrained. We estimate that <~ 85% (99.865% confidence) of the broad-lined Type Ic supernovae in our sample may harbor off-axis $\gamma$-ray-bursts expanding in media with densities in the range probed by this study.
A very massive star with a carbon-oxygen core in the range of $64$ M$_{\odot}<M_{\mathrm{CO}}<133$ M$_{\odot}$ is expected to undergo a very different kind of explosion known as a pair instability supernova. Pair instability supernovae are candidates for superluminous supernovae due to the prodigious amounts of radioactive elements they create. While the basic mechanism for the explosion is understood, how a star reaches a state is not, thus observations of a nearby pair-instability supernova would allow us to test current models of stellar evolution at the extreme of stellar masses. Much will be sought within the electromagnetic radiation we detect from such a supernova but we should not forget that the neutrinos from a pair-instability supernova contain unique signatures of the event that unambiguously identify this type of explosion. We calculate the expected neutrino flux at Earth from two, one-dimensional pair-instability supernova simulations which bracket the mass range of stars which explode by this mechanism taking into account the full time and energy dependence of the neutrino emission and the flavor evolution through the outer layers of the star. We calculate the neutrino signals in five different detectors chosen to represent present or near future designs. We find the more massive progenitors explode as pair-instability supernova which can easily be detected in multiple different neutrino detectors at the `standard' supernova distance of $10\;{\rm kpc}$ producing several events in DUNE, JUNE and SuperKamiokande, while the lightest progenitors only produce a handful of events (if any) in the same detectors. The proposed HyperKamiokande detector would detect neutrinos from a large pair-instability supernova as far as $\sim 50\;{\rm kpc}$ allowing it to reach the Megallanic Clouds and the several very high mass stars known to exist there.
The evolution of a supernova remnant in a cloudy medium as a function of the volume filling factor of the clouds is studied in a three-dimensional axially symmetrical model. The model includes the mixing of heavy elements (metals) ejected by the supernova and their contribution to radiative losses. The interaction of the supernova envelope with the cloudy phase of the interstellar medium leads to nonsimultaneous, and on average earlier, onsets of the radiative phase in different parts of the supernova envelope. Growth in the volume filling factor $f$ leads to a decrease in the time for the transition of the envelope to the radiative phase and a decrease in the envelope's mean radius, due to the increased energy losses by the envelope in the cloudy medium. When the development of hydrodynamical instabilities in the supernova envelope is efficient, the thermal energy falls as $E_t\sim t^{-2.3}$, for the propagation of the supernova remnant through either a homogeneous or a cloudy medium. When the volume filling factor is $f\simgt 0.1$, a layer with excess kinetic energy andmomentumforms far behind the global shock front from the supernova, which traps the hot gas of the cavity in the central part of the supernova remnant. Metals ejected by the supernova are also enclosed in the central region of the remnant, where the initial (high) metallicity is essentially preserved. Thus, the interaction of the supernova envelope with the cloudy interstellar medium appreciably changes the dynamics and structure of the distribution of the gas in the remnant. This affects the observational characteristics of the remnant, in particularly, leading to substantial fluctuations of the emission measure of the gas with $T>10^5$~K and the velocity dispersion of the ionized gas.
We present the Open Supernova Catalog, an online collection of observations and metadata for presently 36,000+ supernovae and related candidates. The catalog is freely available on the web (https://sne.space), with its main interface having been designed to be a user-friendly, rapidly-searchable table accessible on desktop and mobile devices. In addition to the primary catalog table containing supernova metadata, an individual page is generated for each supernova which displays its available metadata, light curves, and spectra spanning X-ray to radio frequencies. The data presented in the catalog is automatically rebuilt on a daily basis and is constructed by parsing several dozen sources, including the data presented in the supernova literature and from secondary sources such as other web-based catalogs. Individual supernova data is stored in the hierarchical, human- and machine-readable JSON format, with the entirety of each supernova's data being contained within a single JSON file bearing its name. The setup we present here, which is based upon open source software maintained via git repositories hosted on github, enables anyone to download the entirety of the supernova dataset to their home computer in minutes, and to make contributions of their own data back to the catalog via git. As the supernova dataset continues to grow, especially in the upcoming era of all-sky synoptic telescopes which will increase the total number of events by orders of magnitude, we hope that the catalog we have designed will be a valuable tool for the community to analyze both historical and contemporary supernovae.
Gamma ray production in supernova remnants is discussed on the basis of current ideas about cosmic ray acceleration.
We have made VLA images of the fields around three young pulsars which have resulted in the discovery of two new supernova remnants and confirmation of a third. We argue that, in at least two cases and perhaps the third, the pulsars are physically associated with these supernova remnants. A review of all known young pulsars shows that the majority are associated with supernova remnants. We show that the typical density of the interstellar medium into which the supernova remnants are evolving has a density of 0.2 cm$^{-3}$ instead of the low value of 0.01 cm$^{-3}$ which had been calculated from other studies, and results in a considerably longer radio lifetime for supernova remnants. Both the morphology of the supernova remnants and the location of the pulsars imply that most of these young pulsars are born with large transverse velocities ($\sim$500 km s$^{-1}$). This high velocity mean in the distribution of pulsar velocities appears to be a general property of the pulsar population at birth, not seen in proper motion studies, due to selection effects. We explore the implications of this result as it relates to the origin of these velocities and the galactic distribution of pulsars. High velocity pulsars can escape their supernova remnant in a very short timescale, comparable to the lifetime of the remnant and may even play a role in extending the observable radio lifetime of the remnant. A significant fraction will be capable of escaping the disk of the Galaxy, producing an extended halo population.
Our search for high-redshift Type Ia supernovae discovered, in its first years, a sample of seven supernovae. Using a "batch" search strategy, almost all were discovered before maximum light and were observed over the peak of their light curves. The spectra and light curves indicate that almost all were Type Ia supernovae at redshifts z = 0.35 -- 0.5. These high-redshift supernovae can provide a distance indicator and "standard clock" to study the cosmological parameters q_0, Lambda, Omega_0, and H_0. This presentation and the following presentations of Kim et al. (1996), Goldhaber et al. (1996), and Pain et al. (1996) will discuss observation strategies and rates, analysis and calibration issues, the sources of measurement uncertainty, and the cosmological implications, including bounds on q_0, of these first high-redshift supernovae from our ongoing search.
We discuss the effects of resonant spin-flavor precession (RSFP) of Majorana neutrinos on heavy element nucleosynthesis in neutrino-heated supernova ejecta and the dynamics of supernovae. In assessing the effects of RSFP, we explicitly include matter-enhanced (MSW) resonant neutrino flavor conversion effects where appropriate. We point out that for plausible ranges of neutrino magnetic moments and proto-neutron star magnetic fields, spin-flavor conversion of $\nu_\tau$ (or $\nu_\mu$) with a cosmologically significant mass (1--100 eV) into a light $\bar \nu_e$ could lead to an enhanced neutron excess in neutrino-heated supernova ejecta. This could be beneficial for models of $r$-process nucleosynthesis associated with late-time neutrino-heated ejecta from supernovae. Similar spin-flavor conversion of neutrinos at earlier epochs could lead to an increased shock reheating rate and, concomitantly, a larger supernova explosion energy. We show, however, that such increased neutrino heating likely will be accompanied by an enhanced neutron excess which could exacerbate the problem of the overproduction of the neutron number $N = 50$ nuclei in the supernova ejecta from this stage. In all of these scenarios, the average $\bar\nu_e$ energy will be increased over those predicted by supernova models with no neutrino mixings. This may allow the SN1987a data to constrain RSFP-based schemes.
Future detection of a supernova neutrino burst by large underground detectors would give important information for the explosion mechanism of collapse-driven supernovae. We studied the statistical analysis for the future detection of a nearby supernova by using a numerical supernova model and realistic Monte-Carlo simulations of detection by the Super-Kamiokande detector. We mainly discuss the detectability of the signatures of the delayed explosion mechanism in the time evolution of the $\anue$ luminosity and spectrum. For a supernova at 10 kpc away from the Earth, we find that not only the signature is clearly discernible, but also the deviation of energy spectrum from the Fermi-Dirac (FD) distribution can be observed. The deviation from the FD distribution would, if observed, provide a test for the standard picture of neutrino emission from collapse-driven supernovae. For the $D$ = 50 kpc case, the signature of the delayed explosion is still observable, but statistical fluctuation is too large to detect the deviation from the FD distribution. We also propose a method for statistical reconstruction of the time evolution of $\anue$ luminosity and spectrum from data, by which we can get a smoother time evolution and smaller statistical errors than a simple, time-binning analysis. This method is useful especially when the available number of events is relatively small, e.g., a supernova in the LMC or SMC. Neutronization burst of $\nu_e$'s produces about 5 scattering events when $D$ = 10 kpc and this signal is difficult to distinguish from $\anue p$ events.
We discuss how detection of gamma-ray emission from the decay of r-process nuclei can improve our understanding of r-process nucleosynthesis. We find that a gamma-ray detector with a sensitivity of 10**(-7)/cm**2/s at 100-700 keV may detect the emission from the decay of Sb125, Cs137, Ce144, Eu155, and Os194 produced in a future Galactic supernova. In addition, such a detector may detect the emission from the decay of Sn126 in the Vela supernova remnant and the diffuse emission from the decay of Sn126 produced by past supernovae in our Galaxy. The required detector sensitivity is similar to what is projected for the proposed Advanced Telescope for High Energy Nuclear Astrophysics (ATHENA). Both the detection of gamma-ray emission from the decay of several r-process nuclei (e.g., Sb125 and Os194) produced in future Galactic supernovae and the detection of emission from the decay of Sn126 in the Vela supernova remnant would prove that supernovae are a site of the r-process. Furthermore, the former detection would allow us to determine whether or not the r-process nuclei are produced in relative proportions specified by the solar r-process abundance pattern in supernova r-process events. Finally, detection of diffuse emission from the decay of Sn126 in our Galaxy would eliminate neutron star/neutron star mergers as the main source for the r-process nuclei near mass number A=126.
We present the UBVRI light curves of the Type Ia supernova SN 1998bu which appeared in the nearby galaxy M96 (NGC 3368). M96 is a spiral galaxy in the Leo I group which has a Cepheid-based distance. Our photometry allows us to calculate the absolute magnitude and reddening of this supernova. These data, when combined with measurements of the four other well-observed supernovae with Cepheid based distances, allow us to calculate the Hubble constant with respect to the Hubble flow defined by the distant Calan/Tololo Type Ia sample. We find a Hubble constant of 64.0 +/- 2.2(internal) +/- 3.5(external) km/s/Mpc, consistent with most previous estimates based on Type Ia supernovae. We note that the two well-observed Type Ia supernovae in Fornax, if placed at the Cepheid distance to the possible Fornax spiral NGC 1365, are apparently too faint with respect to the Calan/Tololo sample calibrated with the five Type Ia supernovae with Cepheid distances to the host galaxies.
With the advent of large, deep surveys, the observation of a strongly gravitationally lensed supernova becomes increasingly likely. High-redshift surveys continue apace, with a handful of type Ia supernovae observed to date at redshifts of one or greater. In addition, a satellite (the Supernova/Acceleration Probe [SNAP]) has been proposed dedicated to observing thousands of supernovae per year out to a redshift of 1.7. Although it is exceedingly unlikely that we will see a multiply-imaged supernova from ongoing surveys, we find that SNAP would observe at least eight such events per year. Since having a standard candle is inessential to most lensing studies, SNAP's large sample of type II supernovae contributes to this rate. Each case of strong lensing allows for a precise determination of time delays, image separations, and relative image magnifications, and the SNAP strong-lensing database will offer measures of $\Omega_m$, $\Omega_\Lambda$, and $H_0$, independent of SNAP's primary goal of establishing the distance-redshift relation. These systems also constrain models for the matter density profiles of galaxies and clusters. Furthermore, lensed type Ia supernovae afford the opportunity to break the mass-sheet degeneracy found in many lensing measurements.
We present a measurement of the rate of distant Type Ia supernovae derived using 4 large subsets of data from the Supernova Cosmology Project. Within this fiducial sample, which surveyed about 12 square degrees, thirty-eight supernovae were detected at redshifts 0.25--0.85. In a spatially-flat cosmological model consistent with the results obtained by the Supernova Cosmology Project, we derive a rest-frame Type Ia supernova rate at a mean redshift $z\simeq0.55$ of $1.53 {^{+0.28}_{-0.25}} {^{+0.32}_{-0.31}} 10^{-4} h^3 {\rm Mpc}^{-3} {\rm yr}^{-1}$ or $0.58 {^{+0.10}_{-0.09}} {^{+0.10}_{-0.09}} h^2 {\rm SNu}$ (1 SNu = 1 supernova per century per $10^{10}$\Lbsun), where the first uncertainty is statistical and the second includes systematic effects. The dependence of the rate on the assumed cosmological parameters is studied and the redshift dependence of the rate per unit comoving volume is contrasted with local estimates in the context of possible cosmic star formation histories and progenitor models.
Condensation in the outer regions of decaying supernovae is an efficient source of dust with grain size up to 1 micron. The largest grains leave the parent galaxy, thus forming "grey" intergalactic dust, which can explain the observed dimming of light from distant supernovae without invoking cosmic acceleration
In the favored progenitor scenario, Type Ia supernovae arise from a white dwarf accreting material from a non-degenerate companion star. Soon after the white dwarf explodes, the ejected supernova material engulfs the companion star; two-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations by Marietta et. al. show that, in the interaction, the companion star carves out a conical hole of opening angle 30-40 degrees in the supernova ejecta. In this paper we use multi-dimensional Monte Carlo radiative transfer calculations to explore the observable consequences of an ejecta-hole asymmetry. We calculate the variation of the spectrum, luminosity, and polarization with viewing angle for the aspherical supernova near maximum light. We find that the supernova looks normal from almost all viewing angles except when one looks almost directly down the hole. In the latter case, one sees into the deeper, hotter layers of ejecta. The supernova is relatively brighter and has a peculiar spectrum characterized by more highly ionized species, weaker absorption features, and lower absorption velocities. The spectrum viewed down the hole is comparable to the class of SN 1991T-like supernovae. We consider how the ejecta-hole asymmetry may explain the current spectropolarimetric observations of SNe Ia, and suggest a few observational signatures of the geometry. Finally, we discuss the variety currently seen in observed SNe Ia and how an ejecta-hole asymmetry may fit in as one of several possible sources of diversity.
We systematically reanalyzed all Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB) afterglow data published through the end of 2002, in an attempt to detect the predicted supernova light component and to gain statistical insight on its phenomenological properties. We fit the observed photometric light curves as the sum of an afterglow, an underlying host galaxy, and a supernova component. The latter is modeled using published multi-color light curves of SN 1998bw as a template. The total sample of afterglows with established redshifts contains 21 bursts (GRB 970228 - GRB 021211). For nine of these GRBs a weak supernova excess (scaled to SN 1998bw) was found, what makes this to one of the first samples of high-z core collapse supernovae. Among this sample are all bursts with redshifts less than ~0.7. These results strongly support the notion that in fact all afterglows of long-duration GRBs contain light from an associated supernova. A statistics of the physical parameters of these GRB-supernovae shows that SN 1998bw was at the bright end of its class, while it was not special with respect to its light curve shape. Finally, we have searched for a potential correlation of the supernova luminosities with the properties of the corresponding bursts and optical afterglows, but we have not found such a relation.
Neutrino processes in semi-transparent supernova matter, opaque to semi-transparent protoneutron star matter, and catalyzed neutron stars are discussed.
The Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP) is aimed at providing an independent measure of change in the the Hubble expansion as a function of redshift, and setting constraints dark energy contribution to the total energy content of the universe. Using type Ia supernovae (SNIa), the CSP differs from other projects to date in its goal of providing an I-band restframe Hubble diagram. The CSP is focused on testing for and reducing systematic uncertainties, obtaining a sample of multiwavelength observations of approximately 200 supernovae over the redshift range 0 < z < 0.6. The UBVRIYJHK data for low-redshift supernova are intended to provide a database for the determination of the Hubble constant, accurate K- and S-corrections, comparison with theoretical models of supernovae, and for comparison with the RIYJ data of high-redshift supernovae. The goal is to measure the evolution of the expansion rate, to characterize the acceleration of the Universe, and constrain the equation of state, w, to a precision and accuracy of 10%. We are also exploring the use of Type II SNae as independent distance indicators. Following an ongoing, initial test period, the project has begun during the fall of 2004. Here an overview of the project is given, and some preliminary results from the pilot program are presented.
In this paper, we review the present state of theoretical models of thermonuclear supernovae, and compare their predicitions with the constraints derived from observations of Type Ia supernovae. The diversity of explosion mechanisms usually found in one-dimensional simulations is a direct consequence of the impossibility to resolve the flame structure under the assumption of spherical symmetry. Spherically symmetric models have been successful in explaining many of the observational features of Type Ia supernovae, but they rely on two kinds of empirical models: one that describes the behaviour of the flame on the scales unresolved by the code, and another that takes account of the evolution of the flame shape. In contrast, three-dimensional simulations are able to compute the flame shape in a self-consistent way, but they still need a model for the propagation of the flame in the scales unresolved by the code. Furthermore, in three dimensions the number of degrees of freedom of the initial configuration of the white dwarf at runaway is much larger than in one dimension. Recent simulations have shown that the sensitivity of the explosion output to the initial conditions can be extremely large. New paradigms of thermonuclear supernovae have emerged from this situation, as the Pulsating Reverse Detonation. The resolution of all these issues must rely on the predictions of observational properties of the models, and their comparison with current Type Ia supernova data, including X-ray spectra of Type Ia supernova remnants.
We present photometric and spectroscopic data of the type II-P supernova 2003gd, which was discovered in M74 close to the end of its plateau phase. SN 2003gd is the first type II supernova to have a directly confirmed red supergiant progenitor. We compare SN 2003gd with SN 1999em, a similar type II-P supernova, and estimate an explosion date of 18th March 2003. We determine a reddening towards the supernova of E(B-V) = 0.14+/-0.06, using three different methods. We also calculate three new distances to M74 of 9.6+/-2.8 Mpc, 7.7+/-1.7 Mpc and 9.6+/-2.2 Mpc. The former was estimated using the Standardised Candle Method (SCM), for type II supernovae, and the latter two using the Brightest Supergiants Method (BSM). When combined with existing kinematic and BSM distance estimates, we derive a mean value of 9.3+/-1.8 Mpc. SN 2003gd was found to have a lower tail luminosity compared to other ``normal'' type II-P SNe bringing into question the nature of this supernova. We present a discussion concluding that this is a ``normal'' type II-P supernova which is consistent with the observed progenitor mass of 8(+4/-2) Mo.
The use of type Ia supernovae as distance indicators for cosmology has initiated a search for theoretical arguments supporting the empirical calibration methods applied. To this end, as a first step, a sound understanding of the origin of the observed diversity in type Ia supernova properties is needed. Here we present a first systematic study of effects resulting from changing some physical parameters of three-dimensional deflagration models of thermonuclear supernovae. In our study we vary the progenitor's carbon-to-oxygen ratio and its central density prior to ignition because both properties are not well determined by stellar evolution theory and they may change from supernova to supernova. Next we compute for these explosion models the nucleosynthesis yields in a post-processing step. This, in addition, allows us to study variations in the progenitor's metallicity by means of different $^{22}$Ne mass fractions in the initial composition. We find that the progenitor's carbon-to-oxygen ratio and its central density affect the energy release of the models and thus the expansion velocity of the supernova. Moreover, we find that changing the metallicity and the central density changes the production of radioactive $^{56}$Ni and thus affects the luminosity. In contrast, the carbon-to-oxygen ratio has little effect on the $^{56}$Ni production. Implications of the found variations of the explosion energy and the produced $^{56}$Ni mass for the type Ia supernova diversity are discussed.
Type IIP (plateau) supernovae are thought to come from stars with initial mass about 8-25 solar masses that end their lives as red supergiants. The expected stellar end points can be found from evolutionary calculations and the corresponding mass loss properties at this point can be estimated from typical values for Galactic stars. The mass loss densities of observed supernovae can be estimated from observations of the thermal X-ray and radio synchrotron emission that result from the interaction of the supernova with the surrounding wind. Type IIP supernovae are expected to have energy-conserving interaction during typical times of observation. Because Type IIP supernovae have an extended period of high optical luminosity, Compton cooling can affect the radio emitting electrons, giving rise to a relatively flat radio light curve in the optically thin regime. Alternatively, a high efficiency of magnetic field production results in synchrotron cooling of the radio emitting electrons. Both the X-ray and radio luminosities are sensitive to the mass loss and initial masses of the progenitor stars, although the turn-on of radio emission is probably the best estimator of circumstellar density. Both the mass loss density and the variation of density with stellar mass are consistent with expectations for the progenitor stars deduced from direct observations of recent supernovae. Current observations are consistent with mass being the only parameter; observations of a supernova in a metal poor region might show how the mass loss depends on metallicity.
In principle, the light from historical supernovae could still be visible as scattered-light echoes even centuries later. However, while echoes have been discovered around some nearby extragalactic supernovae well after the explosion, targeted searches have not recovered any echoes in the regions of historical Galactic supernovae. The discovery of echoes can allow us to pinpoint the supernova event both in position and age and, most importantly, allow us to acquire spectra of the echo light to type the supernova centuries after the direct light from the explosion first reached the Earth. Here we report on the discovery of three faint new variable surface brightness complexes with high apparent proper motion pointing back to well-defined positions in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC). These positions correspond to three of the six smallest (and likely youngest) previously catalogued supernova remnants, and are believed to be due to thermonuclear (Type Ia) supernovae. Using the distance and proper motions of these echo arcs, we estimate ages of 610 and 410 yr for the echoes #2 and #3.
To use type Ia supernovae as standard candles for cosmology we need accurate broadband magnitudes. In practice the observed magnitude may differ from the ideal magnitude-redshift relationship either through intrinsic inhomogeneities in the type Ia supernova population or through observational error. Here we investigate how we can choose filter bandpasses to reduce the error caused by both these effects. We find that bandpasses with large integral fluxes and sloping wings are best able to minimise several sources of observational error, and are also least sensitive to intrinsic differences in type Ia supernovae. The most important feature of a complete filter set for type Ia supernova cosmology is that each bandpass be a redshifted copy of the first. We design practical sets of redshifted bandpasses that are matched to typical high resistivity CCD and HgCdTe infra-red detector sensitivities. These are designed to minimise systematic error in well observed supernovae, final designs for specific missions should also consider signal-to-noise requirements and observing strategy. In addition we calculate how accurately filters need to be calibrated in order to achieve the required photometric accuracy of future supernova cosmology experiments such as the SuperNova-Acceleration-Probe (SNAP), which is one possible realisation of the Joint Dark-Energy mission (JDEM). We consider the effect of possible periodic miscalibrations that may arise from the construction of an interference filter.
In this paper we use high quality X-ray observations from XMM-Newton and Chandra to gain new insights into the explosion that originated Tycho's supernova 433 years ago. We perform a detailed comparison between the ejecta emission from the spatially integrated X-ray spectrum of the supernova remnant and current models for Type Ia supernova explosions. We use a grid of synthetic X-ray spectra based on hydrodynamic models of the evolution of the supernova remnant and self-consistent nonequilibrium ionization calculations for the state of the shocked plasma. We find that the fundamental properties of the X-ray emission in Tycho are well reproduced by a one-dimensional delayed detonation model with a kinetic energy of 1.2e51 erg. All the other paradigms for Type Ia explosions that we have tested fail to provide a good approximation to the observed ejecta emission, including one-dimensional deflagrations, pulsating delayed detonations and sub-Chandrasekhar explosions, as well as deflagration models calculated in three dimensions. Our results require that the supernova ejecta retain some degree of chemical stratification, with Fe-peak elements interior to intermediate mass elements. This strongly suggests that a supersonic burning front (i.e., a detonation) must be involved at some stage in the physics of Type Ia supernova explosions.
The evidence for particle acceleration in supernova shells comes from electrons whose synchrotron emission is observed in radio and X-rays. Recent observations by the HESS instrument reveal that supernova remnants also emit TeV gamma-rays; long awaited experimental evidence that supernova remnants can accelerate cosmic rays up to the ``knee'' energies. Still, uncertainty exists whether these gamma-rays are produced by electrons via inverse Compton scattering or by protons via neutral pion decay. The multi-wavelength spectra of supernova remnants can be fitted with both mechanisms, although a preference is often given to neutral pion decay due to the spectral shape at very high energies. A recent study of the interstellar radiation field indicates that its energy density, especially in the inner Galaxy, is higher than previously thought. In this paper we evaluate the effect of the interstellar radiation field on the inverse Compton emission of electrons accelerated in a supernova remnant located at different distances from the Galactic Centre. We show that contribution of optical and infra-red photons to the inverse Compton emission may exceed the contribution of cosmic microwave background and in some cases broaden the resulted gamma-ray spectrum. Additionally, we show that if a supernova remnant is located close to the Galactic Centre its gamma-ray spectrum will exhibit a ``universal'' cutoff at very high energies due to the Klein-Nishina effect and not due to the cut-off of the electron spectrum. As an example, we apply our calculations to the supernova remnants RX J1713.7-3946 and G0.9+0.1 recently observed by HESS.
We have used the VLBI High Sensitivity Array (VLBA with VLA, Green Bank Telescope, and Arecibo) to search for young radio supernovae in three nearby Wolf Rayet dwarf galaxies containing Super Star Clusters (SSCs) and signs of extreme star formation in the last few million years. No milliarcsecond radio sources were detected in II Zw 40, He 2-10, or NGC 5253, implying that these galaxies contain few radio supernovae, despite the fact that they have at least some star formation going back to 10 million years ago. The upper limits of the source powers range from 6 x 10^17 W/Hz to ~2 x 10^18 W/Hz at 5 GHz, roughly 0.6 to 2.2 times the power of the galactic supernova remnant Cassiopeia A. Comparison with the radio supernova population in Arp 299 implies that the current supernova rates in the three dwarf galaxies are below 10^{-2}/yr, consistent with standard star formation models that predict supernova rates of 10^{-3}/yr or less in our targets. In He 2-10, the VLBI non-detection of a compact VLA source with a significant nonthermal component indicates that this source may be dominated by one or more supernova remnants with ages of a few hundred years or more, which are comparable to Cas~A in power, and size.
Trying to detect the gravitational wave (GW) signal emitted by a type II supernova is a main challenge for the GW community. Indeed, the corresponding waveform is not accurately modeled as the supernova physics is very complex; in addition, all the existing numerical simulations agree on the weakness of the GW emission, thus restraining the number of sources potentially detectable. Consequently, triggering the GW signal with a confidence level high enough to conclude directly to a detection is very difficult, even with the use of a network of interferometric detectors. On the other hand, one can hope to take benefit from the neutrino and optical emissions associated to the supernova explosion, in order to discover and study GW radiation in an event already detected independently. This article aims at presenting some realistic scenarios for the search of the supernova GW bursts, based on the present knowledge of the emitted signals and on the results of network data analysis simulations. Both the direct search and the confirmation of the supernova event are considered. In addition, some physical studies following the discovery of a supernova GW emission are also mentioned: from the absolute neutrino mass to the supernova physics or the black hole signature, the potential spectrum of discoveries is wide.
Systematic error in calculation of z for high redshift type Ia supernovae could help explain unexpected luminosity values that indicate an accelerating rate of expansion of the universe.
We review the nucleosynthesis yields of core-collapse supernovae (SNe) for various stellar masses, explosion energies, and metallicities. Comparison with the abundance patterns of metal-poor stars provides excellent opportunities to test the explosion models and their nucleosynthesis. We show that the abundance patterns of extremely metal-poor (EMP) stars, e.g., the excess of C, Co, Zn relative to Fe, are in better agreement with the yields of hyper-energetic explosions (Hypernovae, HNe) rather than normal supernovae.   We note that the variation of the abundance patterns of EMP stars are related to the diversity of the Supernova-GRB connection. We summarize the diverse properties of (1) GRB-SNe, (2) Non-GRB HNe/SNe, (3) XRF-SN, and (4) Non-SN GRB. In particular, the Non-SN GRBs (dark hypernovae) have been predicted in order to explain the origin of C-rich EMP stars. We show that these variations and the connection can be modeled in a unified manner with the explosions induced by relativistic jets. Finally, we examine whether the most luminous supernova 2006gy can be consistently explained with the pair-instability supernova model.
We examine the dynamics and X-ray spectrum of the young Type Ia supernova remnant 0509-67.5 in the context of the recent results obtained from the optical spectroscopy of its light echo. Our goal is to estimate the kinetic energy of the supernova explosion using Chandra and XMM-Newton observations of the supernova remnant, thus placing the birth event of 0509-67.5 in the sequence of dim to bright Type Ia supernovae. We base our analysis on a standard grid of one-dimensional delayed detonation explosion models, together with hydrodynamic and X-ray spectral calculations of the supernova remnant evolution. From the remnant dynamics and the properties of the O, Si, S, and Fe emission in its X-ray spectrum we conclude that 0509-67.5 was originated ~400 years ago by a bright, highly energetic Type Ia explosion similar to SN 1991T. Our best model has a kinetic energy of 1.4x10E51 erg and synthesizes 0.97 Msun of 56Ni. These results are in excellent agreement with the age estimate and spectroscopy from the light echo. We have thus established the first connection between a Type Ia supernova and its supernova remnant based on a detailed quantitative analysis of both objects.
This paper summarizes our theoretical understanding of supernova events in a "back of the envelope" way. It is intended to aid in the recognition and understanding of those events which are not "standard", and which may provide the most insight.
The aim of this work is the computation of the cosmic Type Ia supernova rates at very high redshifts (z>2). We adopt various progenitor models in order to predict the number of explosions in different scenarios for galaxy formation and to check whether it is possible to select the best delay time distribution model, on the basis of the available observations of Type Ia supernovae. We also computed the Type Ia supernova rate in typical elliptical galaxies of different initial luminous masses and the total amount of iron produced by Type Ia supernovae in each case. It emerges that: it is not easy to select the best delay time distribution scenario from the observational data and this is because the cosmic star formation rate dominates over the distribution function of the delay times; the monolithic collapse scenario predicts an increasing trend of the SN Ia rate at high redshifts whereas the predicted rate in the hierarchical scheme drops dramatically at high redshift; for the elliptical galaxies we note that the predicted maximum of the Type Ia supernova rate depends on the initial galactic mass. The maximum occurs earlier (at about 0.3 Gyr) in the most massive ellipticals, as a consequence of downsizing in star formation. We find that different delay time distributions predict different relations between the Type Ia supernova rate per unit mass at the present time and the color of the parent galaxies and that bluer ellipticals present higher supernova Type Ia rates at the present time.
The Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP) is a five-year survey being carried out at the Las Campanas Observatory to obtain high-quality light curves of ~100 low-redshift Type Ia supernovae in a well-defined photometric system. Here we present the first release of photometric data that contains the optical light curves of 35 Type Ia supernovae, and near-infrared light curves for a subset of 25 events. The data comprise 5559 optical (ugriBV) and 1043 near-infrared (YJHKs) data points in the natural system of the Swope telescope. Twenty-eight supernovae have pre-maximum data, and for 15 of these, the observations begin at least 5 days before B maximum. This is one of the most accurate datasets of low-redshift Type Ia supernovae published to date. When completed, the CSP dataset will constitute a fundamental reference for precise determinations of cosmological parameters, and serve as a rich resource for comparison with models of Type Ia supernovae.
In supernova spectroscopy relatively little attention has been given to the properties of optically thick spectral lines in epochs following the photosphere's recession. Most treatments and analyses of post-photospheric optical spectra of supernovae assume that forbidden-line emission comprises most if not all spectral features. However, evidence exists which suggests that some spectra exhibit line profiles formed via optically thick resonance-scattering even months or years after the supernova explosion. To explore this possibility we present a geometrical approach to supernova spectrum formation based on the "Elementary Supernova" model, wherein we investigate the characteristics of resonance-scattering in optically thick lines while replacing the photosphere with a transparent central core emitting non-blackbody continuum radiation, akin to the optical continuum provided by decaying 56Co formed during the explosion. We develop the mathematical framework necessary for solving the radiative transfer equation under these conditions, and calculate spectra for both isolated and blended lines. Our comparisons with analogous results from the Elementary Supernova code SYNOW reveal several marked differences in line formation. Most notably, resonance lines in these conditions form P Cygni-like profiles, but the emission peaks and absorption troughs shift redward and blueward, respectively, from the line's rest wavelength by a significant amount, despite the spherically symmetric distribution of the line optical depth in the ejecta. These properties and others that we find in this work could lead to misidentification of lines or misattribution of properties of line-forming material at post-photospheric times in supernova optical spectra.
The results of multi-epoch observations of the southern starburst galaxy, NGC 253, with the Australian Long Baseline Array (LBA) at 2.3 GHz are presented. As with previous radio interferometric observations of this galaxy, no new sources were discovered. By combining the results of this survey with Very Large Array observations at higher frequencies from the literature, spectra were derived and a free-free absorption model was fitted of 20 known sources in NGC 253. The results were found to be consistent with previous studies. The supernova remnant, 5.48-43.3, was imaged with the highest sensitivity and resolution to date, revealing a two-lobed morphology. Comparisons with previous observations of similar resolution give an upper limit of 10,000 km/s for the expansion speed of this remnant. We derive a supernova rate of <0.2 per yr for the inner 300 pc using a model that improves on previous methods by incorporating an improved radio supernova peak luminosity distribution and by making use of multi-wavelength radio data spanning 21 years. A star formation rate of SFR(M>5 M_solar)<4.9 M_solar per yr was also estimated using the standard relation between supernova and star-formation rates. Our improved estimates of supernova and star-formation rates are consistent with studies at other wavelengths. The results of our study point to the possible existence of a small population of undetected supernova remnants, suggesting a low rate of radio supernovae production in NGC 253.
We investigate the possibility of a super-luminous Type Ic core-collapse supernovae producing a large amount of 56Ni. Very massive stars with a main-sequence mass larger than 100 Msun and a metallicity 0.001 < Z < 0.004 are expected to explode as super-luminous Type Ic supernovae. Stars with ~ 110 - 150 Msun and Z < 0.001 would explode as Type Ic pulsational pair-instability supernovae if the whole H and He layers has been lost by the mass loss during pulsational pair-instability. We evaluate the total ejecta mass and the yields of 56Ni, O, and Si in core-collapse supernovae evolved from very massive stars. We adopt 43.1 and 61.1 Msun WO stars with Z=0.004 as supernova progenitors expected to explode as Type Ic core-collapse supernovae. These progenitors have masses of 110 and 250 Msun at the zero-age main sequence. Spherical explosions with an explosion energy larger than 2e52 erg produce more than 3.5 Msun 56Ni, enough to reproduce the light curve of SN 2007bi. Asphericity of the explosion affects the total ejecta mass as well as the yields of 56Ni, O, and Si. Aspherical explosions of the 110 and 250 Msun models reproduce the 56Ni yield of SN 2007bi. These explosions will also show large velocity dispersion. An aspherical core-collapse supernova evolved from a very massive star is a possibility of the explosion of SN 2007bi.
We summarize the recent developments in our understanding of neutrino flavour conversion in core-collapse supernovae and discuss open questions.
Using idealized 1-D Eulerian hydrodynamic simulations, we contrast the behavior of isolated supernovae with the superbubbles driven by multiple, collocated supernovae. Continuous energy injection via successive supernovae going off within the hot/dilute bubble maintains a strong termination shock. This strong shock keeps the superbubble over-pressured and drives the outer shock well after it becomes radiative. Isolated supernovae, in contrast, with no further energy injection, become radiative quite early ($\lesssim 0.1$ Myr, 10s of pc), and stall at scales $\lesssim 100$ pc. We show that isolated supernovae lose almost all of their mechanical energy by a Myr, but superbubbles can retain up to $\sim 40\%$ of the input energy in form of mechanical energy over the lifetime of the star cluster (few 10s of Myr). These conclusions hold even in the presence of realistic magnetic fields and thermal conduction. We also compare various recipes for implementing supernova feedback in numerical simulations. For various feedback prescriptions we derive the spatial scale below which the energy needs to be deposited for it to couple to the interstellar medium (ISM). We show that a steady thermal wind within the superbubble appears only for a large number ($\gtrsim 10^4$) of supernovae. For smaller clusters we expect multiple internal shocks instead of a smooth, dense thermalized wind.
We report the results of the photometric and spectroscopic monitoring campaign of the transient SN 2007sv. The observables are similar to those of type IIn supernovae, a well-known class of objects whose ejecta interact with pre-existing circum-stellar material. The spectra show a blue continuum at early phases and prominent Balmer lines in emission, however, the absolute magnitude at the discovery of SN 2007sv (M_R = - 14.25 +/- 0.38) indicate it to be most likely a supernova impostor. This classification is also supported by the lack of evidence in the spectra of very high velocity material as expected in supernova ejecta. In addition we find no unequivocal evidence of broad lines of alpha - and/or Fe-peak elements. The comparison with the absolute light curves of other interacting objects (including type IIn supernovae) highlights the overall similarity with the prototypical impostor SN 1997bs. This supports our claim that SN 2007sv was not a genuine supernova, and was instead a supernova impostor, most likely similar to the major eruption of a luminous blue variable.
This paper presents an analysis of core-collapse supernova distributions in isolated and interacting host galaxies, paying close attention to the selection effects involved in conducting host galaxy supernova studies. When taking into account all of the selection effects within our host galaxy sample, we draw the following conclusions: i) Within interacting, or 'disturbed', systems there is a real, and statistically significant, increase in the fraction of stripped-envelope supernovae in the central regions. A discussion into what may cause this increased fraction, compared to the more common type IIP supernovae, and type II supernovae without sub-classifications, is presented. Selection effects are shown not to drive this result, and so we propose that this study provides direct evidence for a high-mass weighted initial mass function within the central regions of disturbed galaxies. ii) Within 'undisturbed' spiral galaxies the radial distribution of type Ib and type Ic supernovae is statistically very different, with the latter showing a more centrally concentrated distribution. This could be driven by metallicity gradients in these undisturbed galaxies, or radial variations in other properties (binarity or stellar rotation) driving envelope loss in progenitor stars. This result is not found in 'disturbed' systems, where the distributions of type Ib and Ic supernovae are consistent.
We present photometric and spectroscopic observations of ASASSN-13co, an unusually luminous Type II supernova and the first core-collapse supernova discovered by the All-Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN). First detection of the supernova was on UT 2013 August 29 and the data presented span roughly 3.5 months after discovery. We use the recently developed model from Pejcha & Prieto (2015) to model the multi-band light curves of ASASSN-13co and derive the bolometric luminosity curve. We compare ASASSN-13co to other Type II supernovae to show that it was unusually luminous for a Type II supernova and that it exhibited an atypical light curve shape that does not cleanly match that of either a standard Type II-L or Type II-P supernova.
The LaSilla/QUEST Variability Survey (LSQ) and the Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP II) are collaborating to discover and obtain photometric light curves for a large sample of low redshift (z < 0.1) Type Ia supernovae. The supernovae are discovered in the LSQ survey using the 1 m ESO Schmidt telescope at the La Silla Observatory with the 10 square degree QUEST camera. The follow-up photometric observations are carried out using the 1 m Swope telescope and the 2.5 m du Pont telescopes at the Las Campanas Observatory. This paper describes the survey, discusses the methods of analyzing the data and presents the light curves for the first 31 Type Ia supernovae obtained in the survey. The SALT 2.4 supernova light curve fitter was used to analyze the photometric data, and the Hubble diagram for this first sample is presented. The measurement errors for these supernovae averaged 4%, and their intrinsic spread was 14%.
The hydrodynamical interaction between freely expanding supernova ejecta and a relativistic wind injected from the central region is studied in analytic and numerical ways. As a result of the collision between the ejecta and the wind, a geometrically thin shell surrounding a hot bubble forms and expands in the ejecta. We use a self-similar solution to describe the early dynamical evolution of the shell and carry out a two-dimensional special relativistic hydrodynamic simulation to follow further evolution. The Rayleigh-Taylor instability inevitably develops at the contact surface separating the shocked wind and ejecta, leading to the complete destruction of the shell and the leakage of hot gas from the hot bubble. The leaking hot materials immediately catch up with the outermost layer of the supernova ejecta and thus different layers of the ejecta are mixed. We present the spatial profiles of hydrodynamical variables and the kinetic energy distributions of the ejecta. We stop the energy injection when a total energy of $10^{52}$ erg, which is 10 times larger than the initial kinetic energy of the supernova ejecta, is deposited into the ejecta and follow the subsequent evolution. From the results of our simulations, we consider expected emission from supernova ejecta powered by the energy injection at the centre and discuss the possibility that superluminous supernovae and broad-lined Ic supernovae could be produced by similar mechanisms.
Supernovae are the most powerful cosmic sources of MeV neutrinos. These elementary particles play a crucial role when the evolution of a massive star is terminated by the collapse of its core to a neutron star or a black hole and the star explodes as supernova. The release of electron neutrinos, which are abundantly produced by electron captures, accelerates the catastrophic infall and causes a gradual neutronization of the stellar plasma by converting protons to neutrons as dominant constituents of neutron star matter. The emission of neutrinos and antineutrinos of all flavors carries away the gravitational binding energy of the compact remnant and drives its evolution from the hot initial to the cold final state. The absorption of electron neutrinos and antineutrinos in the surroundings of the newly formed neutron star can power the supernova explosion and determines the conditions in the innermost supernova ejecta, making them an interesting site for the nucleosynthesis of iron-group elements and trans-iron nuclei. In this Chapter the basic neutrino physics in supernova cores and nascent neutron stars will be discussed. This includes the most relevant neutrino production, absorption, and scattering processes, elementary aspects of neutrino transport in dense environments, the characteristic neutrino emission phases with their typical signal features, and the perspectives connected to a measurement of the neutrino signal from a future galactic supernova.
The ejected mass distribution of type Ia supernovae directly probes progenitor evolutionary history and explosion mechanisms, with implications for their use as cosmological probes. Although the Chandrasekhar mass is a natural mass scale for the explosion of white dwarfs as type Ia supernovae, models allowing type Ia supernovae to explode at other masses have attracted much recent attention. Using an empirical relation between the ejected mass and the light curve width, we derive ejected masses $M_\mathrm{ej}$ and $^{56}$Ni masses $M_\mathrm{Ni}$ for a sample of 337 type Ia supernovae with redshifts $z < 0.7$ used in recent cosmological analyses. We use hierarchical Bayesian inference to reconstruct the joint $M_\mathrm{ej}$-$M_\mathrm{Ni}$ distribution, accounting for measurement errors. The inferred marginal distribution of $M_\mathrm{ej}$ has a long tail towards sub-Chandrasekhar masses, but cuts off sharply above 1.4 $M_\odot$. Our results imply that 25\%-50\% of normal type Ia supernovae are inconsistent with Chandrasekhar-mass explosions, with almost all of these being sub-Chandrasekhar-mass; super-Chandrasekhar-mass explosions make up no more than 1\% of all spectroscopically normal type Ia supernovae. We interpret the type Ia supernova width-luminosity relation as an underlying relation between $M_\mathrm{ej}$ and $M_\mathrm{Ni}$, and show that the inferred relation is not naturally explained by the predictions of any single known explosion mechanism.
Host galaxy properties provide strong constraints on the stellar progenitors of superluminous supernovae. By comparing a sample of 19 low-redshift (z < 0.3) superluminous supernova hosts to galaxy populations in the local Universe, we show that sub-solar metallicities seem to be a requirement. All superluminous supernovae in hosts with high measured gas-phase metallicities are found to explode at large galactocentric radii, indicating that the metallicity at the explosion site is likely lower than the integrated host value. We found that superluminous supernovae hosts do not always have star-formation rates higher than typical star-forming galaxies of the same mass. However, we confirm that high absolute specific star-formation rates are a feature of superluminous supernova host galaxies, but interpret this as simply a consequence of the anti-correlation between gas-phase metallicity and specific star-formation rate and the requirement of on-going star formation to produce young, massive stars greater than ~ 10-20 M_sol. Based on our sample, we propose an upper limit of ~ 0.5 Z_sol for forming superluminous supernova progenitors (assuming an N2 metallicity diagnostic and a solar oxygen abundance of 8.69). Finally, we show that if magnetar powering is the source of the extreme luminosity then the required initial spins appear to be correlated with metallicity of the host galaxy. This correlation needs further work, but if it holds it is a powerful link between the supernova parameters and nature of the progenitor population.
We investigate the explosive nucleosynthesis during two dimensional neutrino-driven explosion of ultra-stripped Type Ic supernovae evolved from 1.45 and 1.5 M$_\odot$ CO stars. These supernovae explode with the explosion energy of $\sim 10^{50}$ erg and release $\sim 0.1$ M$_\odot$ ejecta. The light trans-iron elements Ga-Zr are produced in the neutrino-irradiated ejecta. The abundance distribution of these elements has a large uncertainty because of the uncertainty of the electron fraction of the neutrino-irradiated ejecta. The yield of the elements will be less than 0.01 M$_\odot$. Ultra-stripped supernova and core-collapse supernova evolved from a light CO core can be main sources of the light trans-iron elements. They could also produce neutron-rich nuclei $^{48}$Ca. The ultra-stripped supernovae eject $^{56}$Ni of $\sim$ 0.006 - 0.01 M$_\odot$. If most of neutrino-irradiated ejecta is proton-rich, $^{56}$Ni will be produced more abundantly. The light curves of these supernovae indicate sub-luminous fast decaying explosion with the peak magnitude of about $-15$ - $-16$. Future observations of ultra-stripped supernovae could give a constraint to the event rate of a class of neutron star mergers.
We present early-time Swift and Chandra X-ray data along with late-time optical and near-infrared observations of SN 2013by, a Type IIL supernova (SN) that occurred in the nearby spiral galaxy ESO 138$-$G10 (D $\sim 14.8$ Mpc). Optical and NIR photometry and spectroscopy follow the late-time evolution of the supernova from days +89 to +457 post-maximum brightness. The optical spectra and X-ray light curves are consistent with the picture of a SN having prolonged interaction with circumstellar material (CSM) that accelerates the transition from supernova to supernova remnant (SNR). Specifically, we find SN 2013by's H$\alpha$ profile exhibits significant broadening ($\sim$ 10,000 km s$^{-1}$) on day +457, the likely consequence of high-velocity, H-rich material being excited by a reverse shock. A relatively flat X-ray light curve is observed that cannot be modeled using inverse-Compton scattering processes alone but requires an additional energy source most likely originating from the SN-CSM interaction. In addition, we see the first overtone of CO emission near 2.3 $\mu$m on day +152, signaling the formation of molecules and dust in the SN ejecta and is the first time CO has been detected in a Type IIL supernova. We compare SN 2013by to Type IIP supernovae whose spectra show the rarely observed SN-to-SNR transition in varying degrees and conclude that Type IIL SNe may enter the remnant phase at earlier epochs than their Type IIP counterparts.
Almost since the beginning, massive stars and their resultant supernovae have played a crucial role in the Universe. These objects produce tremendous amounts of energy and new, heavy elements that enrich galaxies, encourage new stars to form and sculpt the shapes of galaxies we see today. The end of millions of years of massive star evolution and the beginning of hundreds or thousands of years of supernova evolution are separated by a matter of a few seconds, in which some of the most extreme physics found in the Universe causes the explosive and terminal disruption of the star. Key questions remain unanswered in both the studies of how massive stars evolve and the behaviour of supernovae, and it appears the solutions may not lie on just one side of the explosion or the other or in just the domain of the stellar evolution or the supernova astrophysics communities. The need to view massive star evolution and supernovae as continuous phases in a single narrative motivated the Theo Murphy international scientific meeting "Bridging the gap: from massive stars to supernovae" at Chicheley Hall in June 2016, with the specific purpose to simultaneously address the scientific connections between theoretical and observational studies of massive stars and their supernovae, through engaging astronomers from both communities.
The evolutionary pathways of core-collapse supernova progenitors at the low-mass end of the spectrum are beset with major uncertainties. In recent years, a variety of evolutionary channels has been discovered in addition to the classical electron capture supernova channel of super-AGB stars. The few available progenitor models at the low-mass end have been studied with great success in supernova simulations as the peculiar density structure makes for robust neutrino-driven explosions in this mass range. Detailed nucleosynthesis calculations have been conducted both for models of electron capture supernovae and low-mass iron core supernovae and revealed an interesting production of the lighter trans-iron elements (such as Zn, Sr, Y, Zr) as well as rare isotopes like Ca-48 and Fe-60. We stress the need to explore the low-mass end of the supernova spectrum further and link various observables to understand the diversity of explosions in this regime.
It is shown that investigation of ionization zones left after supernova explosions can yield information on the mechanism active in those explosions.
Recent observational studies of core-collapse supernovae suggest only stars with zero-age main sequence masses smaller than $16$-$18\ M_\odot$ explode when they are red supergiants, producing type IIP supernovae. This may imply that more massive stars produce other types of supernovae or they simply collapse to black holes without giving rise to bright supernovae. This failed supernova hypothesis can lead to significantly inefficient oxygen production because oxygen abundantly produced in inner layers of massive stars with zero-age main sequence masses around $20$-$30\ M_\odot$ might not be ejected into the surrounding interstellar space. We first assume an unspecified population of oxygen injection events related to massive stars and obtain a model-independent constraint on how much oxygen should be released in a single event and how frequently such events should happen. We further carry out one-box galactic chemical enrichment calculations with different mass ranges of massive stars exploding as core-collapse supernovae. Our results suggest that the model assuming that all massive stars with $9$-$100\ M_\odot$ explode as core-collapse supernovae is still most appropriate in explaining the solar abundances of oxygen and iron and their enrichment history in the Galaxy. The oxygen mass in the Galaxy is not explained when assuming that only massive stars with zero-age main sequence masses in the range of 9-17 $M_\odot$, contribute to the galactic oxygen enrichment. This finding implies that a good fraction of stars more massive than $17M_\odot$ should eject their oxygen layers in either supernova explosions or some other mass loss processes.
Significant observational effort has been devoted to determining volumetric type Ia supernova rates at high redshifts, leading to clues about the nature of Ia supernova progenitors and constraints on the iron production in the universe. A complementary approach is to investigate type Ia supernova rates in individual, more nearby, galaxies. The popular A+B model for the specific supernova rate, while reliable for a wide range of galaxy properties, diverges for large specific star formation rates. Applying it outside its range of validity could lead to the prediction of excessive type Ia supernova rates. Moreover, the A+B model it is not directly derived from a delay time distribution. We here introduce a new model which is explicitly motivated by a simple delay time distribution composed of a prompt and a delayed component. The model is in remarkably good agreement with current observational constraints. It yields a prompt fraction of $f_{p}= 0.11^{+0.10}_{-0.06}$ in agreement with results based on volumetric rates of type Ia supernovae at high redshift (Rodney et al. 2014). The model is tested against realistic star formation rates from the Illustris-1 simulation and is found to be self consistent in the asymptotic limits. An analytic function that encapsulates the features of the new model is shown to be in excellent agreement with the data. In terms of goodness of fit, the new model is strongly preferred over the A+B model. At $\log{({\rm sSFR})} \gtrsim -9$ there are no constraints from observations. Observations in this regime will further constrain the delay time distribution of type Ia supernovae at short delay times.
Because core-collapse supernovae are the explosions of massive stars, which have relatively short lifetimes, they occur almost exclusively in galaxies with active star formation. On the other hand, the Type Ibn supernova PS1-12sk exploded in an environment much more typical of thermonuclear (Type Ia) supernovae: on the outskirts of the brightest elliptical galaxy in a galaxy cluster. The lack of any obvious star formation at that location presented a challenge to models of Type Ibn supernovae as the explosions of very massive Wolf-Rayet stars. Here we present a supplementary search for star formation at the site of PS1-12sk, now that the supernova has faded, via deep ultraviolet imaging of the host cluster with the Hubble Space Telescope. We do not detect any ultraviolet emission within 1 kpc of the supernova location, which allows us deepen the limit on star formation rate by an order of magnitude compared to the original study on this event. In light of this new limit, we discuss whether the progenitors of Type Ibn supernovae can be massive stars and what reasonable alternatives have been proposed.
Effect of gravitational magnification on the measurement of distance modulus of type Ia supernovae is presented. We investigate a correlation between magnification and Hubble residual to explore how the magnification affects the estimation of cosmological parameters. We estimate magnification of type Ia supernovae in two distinct methods: one is based on convergence mass reconstruction under the weak lensing limit and the other is based on the direct measurement from galaxies distribution. Both magnification measurements are measured from Subaru Hyper Suprime-Cam survey catalogue. For both measurements, we find no significant correlation between Hubble residual and magnification. Furthermore, we correct for the apparent supernovae fluxes obtained by Supernova Legacy Survey 3-year sample using direct measurement of the magnification. We find $\Omega_{\rm m0} = 0.287 ^{+0.104} _{-0.085}$ and $w = -1.161 ^{+0.595}_{-0.358}$ for supernovae samples corrected for lensing magnification when we use photometric redshift catalogue of Mizuki, while $\Omega_{\rm m0} = 0.253 ^{+0.113} _{-0.087}$ and $w = -1.078 ^{+0.498} _{-0.297}$ for DEmP photo-z catalogue. Therefore, we conclude that the effect of magnification on the supernova cosmology is negligibly small for the current surveys; however, it has to be considered for the future supernova survey like LSST.
We address a simple model where the Kennicutt-Schmidt (KS) relation between the macroscopic densities of star-formation rate (SFR, $\rho_{\rm sfr}$) and gas ($n$) in galactic discs emerges from self-regulation of the SFR via supernova feedback. It arises from the physics of supernova bubbles, insensitive to the microscopic SFR recipe and not explicitly dependent on gravity. The key is that the filling factor of SFR-suppressed supernova bubbles self-regulates to a constant, $f\sim 0.5$. Expressing the bubble fading radius and time in terms of $n$, the filling factor is $f \propto S\,n^{-s}$ with $s\sim 1.5$, where $S$ is the supernova rate density. A constant $f$ thus refers to $\rho_{\rm sfr} \propto n^{1.5}$, with a density-independent SFR efficiency per free-fall time $\sim 0.01$. The self-regulation to $f \sim 0.5$ and the convergence to a KS relation independent of the local SFR recipe are demonstrated in cosmological and isolated-galaxy simulations using different codes and recipes. In parallel, the spherical analysis of bubble evolution is generalized to clustered supernovae, analytically and via simulations, yielding $s \simeq 1.5 \pm 0.5$. An analysis of photo-ionized bubbles about pre-supernova stars yields a range of KS slopes but the KS relation is dominated by the supernova bubbles. Superbubble blowouts may lead to an alternative self-regulation by outflows and recycling. While the model is over-simplified, its simplicity and validity in the simulations may argue that it captures the origin of the KS relation.
Cassiopeia A is a nearby young supernova remnant that provides a unique laboratory for the study of core-collapse supernova explosions. Cassiopeia A is known to be a Type IIb supernova from the optical spectrum of its light echo, but the immediate progenitor of the supernova remains uncertain. Here we report results of near-infrared, high-resolution spectroscopic observations of Cassiopeia A where we detected the pristine circumstellar material of the supernova progenitor. Our observations revealed a strong emission line of iron (Fe) from a circumstellar clump that has not yet been processed by the supernova shock wave. A comprehensive analysis of the observed spectra, together with an HST image, indicates that the majority of Fe in this unprocessed circumstellar material is in the gas phase, not depleted onto dust grains as in the general interstellar medium. This result is consistent with a theoretical model of dust condensation in material that is heavily enriched with CNO-cycle products, supporting the idea that the clump originated near the He core of the progenitor. It has been recently found that Type IIb supernovae can result from the explosion of a blue supergiant with a thin hydrogen envelope, and our results support such a scenario for Cassiopeia A.
We discover a new dynamical mechanism that significantly enhances the growth of Rayleigh-Taylor fingers developed near the contact interface between the supernova ejecta and swept-up ambient gas in young supernova remnants if the supernova remnant expands into a clumpy (cloudy) circumstellar medium. Our numerical simulation demonstrates that large Rayleigh-Taylor fingers can obtain a sufficient terminal velocity to protrude through the forward shock front by taking extra kinetic energy from vorticies generated by shock-cloud interactions. We suggest this mechanism as a means to generate the aspherical expansion of the supernova ejecta. Ambient magnetic fields are stretched and amplified as the Rayleigh-Taylor fingers protrude, possibly leading to strongly enhanced radio emission. The material in the protrusions originates from the ejected stellar material with greatly enhanced heavy elements. Therefore, it can be a strong X-ray emitter. The timescale for the Rayleigh-Taylor fingers to reach the forward shock depends on the size, mass density and distribution of clouds being engulfed by the supernova shock, although the details will require further numerical investigation.
A new component of the Universe which leads to an accelerated cosmic expansion is found from the measurements of distances to high-redshift type Ia supernovae. We describe the method and the results obtained from the observations of distant supernovae. The dependence on the understanding of the local type Ia supernovae is stressed. The lack of a good understanding of the stellar evolution leading to the explosion of the white dwarf, the exact explosion physics and the current difficulties in calculating the emission from the ejecta limit the theoretical support. Despite the current ignorance of some of the basic physics of the explosions, the cosmological result is robust. The empirical relations seem to hold for the distant supernovae the same way as for the local ones and the spectral appearance is identical. The distances to the high-redshift supernovae are larger than expected in a freely coasting, i.e. empty, Universe. A positive cosmological constant is inferred from these measurements.
The spatial and temporal coincidence of a GRB and a supernova explosion (1998bw) on 25 April 1998 has raised conjectures on the physical connection between the two phenomena, and in general on the association of GRBs with supernovae, at least with the most powerful among them (hypernovae or collapsars). In fact, multiwavelength observations of SN 1998bw have revealed unusual characteristics: extremely high energy output at radio and optical wavelengths, and relativistic expansion of the outgoing shock. The X-ray emission of SN 1998bw, monitored by BeppoSAX starting ~10 hours after the GRB detection, was remarkably prompt (within one day of supernova detonation), but exhibited spectral and temporal properties similar to those of other supernovae detected in X-rays.
Supernovae in distant galaxies that are gravitationally lensed by foreground galaxy clusters make excellent cosmological candles for measuring quantities like the density of the Universe in its various components and the Hubble constant. Distant supernovae will be more easily detectable since foreground cluster lenses would magnify such supernovae by up to 3-4 magnitudes. We show that in the case of the lens cluster Abell 2218, the detectability of high-redshift supernovae is significantly enhanced due to the lensing effects of the cluster. Since lensed supernovae will remain point images even when their host galaxies are stretched into arcs, the signal-to-noise ratio for their observation will be further enhanced, typically by an order of magnitude. We recommend monitoring well-modelled clusters with several known arclets for the detection of cosmologically useful SNe around z=1 and beyond.
There is increasing evidence that low mass stars with circumstellar disks can be born close to massive stars, in some cases within tenths of a pc. If the disks have lifetimes greater than those of the more massive stars, they are exposed to the radiation fields and gas flows from the late evolutionary phases and supernovae of the massive stars. The fast flows from supernovae are likely to give some stripping of mass from the disks, but do not typically lead to complete disruption of the disks. In the slow wind from a red supergiant star, there is the possibility of gravitational accretion of wind matter onto the circumstellar disk. In the supernova explosion of a red supergiant, the radiative flux at the time of shock breakout can heat and ionize a nearby disk, leading to transient, narrow line emission. There are consequences for the solar nebula if it was born ~0.2 pc from a massive star that became a red supergiant. Accretion from the wind could supply a substantial amount of 26Al to the disk. The high radiative luminosity of the eventual supernova could lead to the melting of dust grains and the formation of chondrules. The passage of the supernova ejecta could drive a shock wave in the disk, heating it.
Recent use of Type Ia supernovae to measure acceleration of the universe has motivated questions regarding their optimal use to constrain cosmological parameters Omega_M, Omega_{\Lambda} and w_Q. In this work we address the question: what is the optimal distribution of supernovae in redshift in order to best constrain the cosmological parameters? The solution to this problem is not only of theoretical interest, but can be useful in planning supernova searches. Using the Fisher matrix formalism we show that the error ellipsoid corresponding to N parameters (for N=1, 2, 3) has the smallest volume if the supernovae are located at N discrete redshifts, with equal number of supernovae at each redshift and with one redshift always being the maximum one probed. Including marginalization over the ``nuisance parameter'' M changes this result only trivially.
The cosmic-ray spectrum up to the knee ($E\sim 10^{15}$ eV) is attributed to acceleration processes taking place at the blastwaves which bound supernova remnants. Theoretical predictions give a similar estimate for the maximum energy which can be reached at supernova remnant shocks by particle acceleration. Electrons with energies of the order $\sim 10^{15}$ eV should give a nonthermal X-ray component in young supernova remnants. Recent observations of SN1006 and G347.3-0.5 confirm this prediction. We present a method which uses hydrodynamical simulations to describe the evolution of a young remnant. These results are combined with an algorithm which simultaneously calculates the associated particle acceleration. We use the test particle approximation, which means that the back-reaction on the dynamics of the remnant by the energetic particles is neglected. We present synchrotron maps in the X-ray domain, and present spectra of the energies of the electrons in the supernova remnant. Some of our results can be compared directly with earlier semi-analytical work on this subject by Reynolds [1].
We have used the Owens Valley Radio Observatory Millimeter Array to obtain a map of the J = (1-0) CO emission from the circumstellar shell around HD 179821, a highly evolved G-type star which will probably explode as a supernova in the next 100,000 yr. Very approximately, the gas presents as a circular ring with azimuthal variations in the CO brightness by about a factor of 2. Until about 1600 years ago, the star was a red hypergiant losing about 0.0003 M(Sun)/yr at an average outflow speed of 32 km/s. We propose that when HD 179821 explodes as a supernova, it may resemble Kepler's supernova remnant and thus some of the anisotropies in supernova remnants may be intrinsic. If the factors which cause the anisotropic mass loss in HD 179821 persist to the moment when the star explodes as a supernova, the newly-born pulsar may receive a momentum "kick" leading to a space motion near 700 km/s. Independent of the angular asymmetries, the radially detached shell around HD 179821 may be representative of environments which produce dust echoes from gamma-ray bursts.
Dark matter in the Universe consisting of macroscopic objects such as primordial black holes may cause gravitational lensing of distant objects. The magnification associated with lensing will lead to additional scatter in the received flux from standard candles, and too small an observed scatter could rule out compact dark matter entirely. In this letter, we show how the scatter in fluxes of distant Type 1a supernovae could be used to distinguish between models with and without lensing by macroscopic dark matter. The proposed SNAP project, with $\sim 2400$ supernovae in the range $0.1\ls z\ls 1.7$, should be able to identify models at 99.9% confidence, if systematic errors are controlled. Note that this test is independent of any evolution of the mean supernova luminosity with redshift. The variances of the current Supernova Cosmology Project sample do not rule out compact lenses as dark matter: formally they favour such a population, but the significance is low, and removal of a single faint supernova from the sample reverses the conclusion.
We present a new model for gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) that are not only associated with supernovae but also have small baryon contamination. In this model, we assume a newborn neutron star to move outward at a kick velocity of $\sim 10^3 {\rm km} {\rm s}^{-1}$ in the supernova ejecta. We find that such a neutron star still hypercritically accretes its surrounding supernova matter. Once the stellar mass increases to some critical mass, the neutron star will undergo a phase transition to become a strange star, leading to an energy release of a few $10^{52}$ ergs. The phase transition, if possibly occuring just near the supernova front, will first result in an ultra-relativistic fireball and then a GRB. This provides a plausible explanation for the GRB-supernova association. We estimate the burst rate to be $\sim 10^{-6}$ per year per galaxy. Our model also predicts other possiblities. For example, if the resulting fireballs have a Lorentz factor of the order of a few, they will produce X-ray GRBs observed by BeppoSAX. We find the rate of such bursts to be $\sim 10^{-5}$ per year per galaxy.
Clusters of galaxies are thought to contain about ten times as much dark matter as baryonic matter. The dark component therefore dominates the gravitational potential of the cluster, and the baryons confined by this potential radiate X-rays with a luminosity that depends mainly on the gas density in the cluster's core. Predictions of the X-rays' properties based on models of cluster formation do not, however, agree with the observations. If the models ignore the condensation of cooling gas into stars and feedback from the associated supernovae, they overestimate the X-ray luminosity because the density of the core gas is too high. An early episode of uniformly distributed supernova feedback could rectify this by heating the uncondensed gas and therefore making it harder to compress into the core, but such a process seems to require an implausibly large number of supernovae. Here we show how radiative cooling of intergalactic gas and subsequent supernova heating conspire to eliminate highly compressible low-entropy gas from the intracluster medium. This brings the core entropy and X-ray luminosities of clusters into agreement with the observations, in a way that depends little on the efficiency of supernova heating in the early Universe.
This paper estimates the relative frequency of different types of core-collapse supernovae, in terms of the ratio f between the number of type Ib--Ic and of type II supernovae. We estimate f independently for all normal and Seyfert galaxies whose radial velocity is <=14000 km/s, and which had at least one supernova event recorded in the Asiago catalogue from January 1986 to August 2000. We find that the ratio f is approx. 0.23+/-0.05 in normal galaxies. This value is consistent with constant star formation rate and with a Salpeter Initial Mass Function and average binary rate approx. 50 %. On the contrary, Seyfert galaxies exceed the ratio f in normal galaxies by a factor approx. 4 at a confidence level >= 2 sigma. A caveat is that the numbers for Seyferts are still small (6 type Ib-Ic and 6 type II supernovae discovered as yet). Assumed real, this excess of type Ib and Ic with respect to type II supernovae, may indicate a burst of star formation of young age (<= 20 Myr), a high incidence of binary systems in the inner regions (r <= 0.4 R25) of Seyfert galaxies, or a top-loaded mass function.
The probable association with GRB 980425 immediately put SN 1998bw at the forefront of supernova research. Here, we present revised late-time BVRI light curves of the supernova, based on template images taken at the VLT. To follow the supernova to the very last observable phases we have used HST/STIS. Deep images taken in June and November 2000 are compared to images taken in August 2001. The identification of the supernova is firmly established. This allows us to measure the light curve to about 1000 days past explosion. The main features are a rapid decline up to more than 500 days after explosion, with no sign of complete positron trapping from the Cobolt-56 decay. Thereafter, the light curve flattens out significantly. One possible explanation is powering by more long lived radioactive isotopes, if they are abundantly formed in this energetic supernova.
The measurement of the cosmological parameters from Type Ia supernovae hinges on our ability to compare nearby and distant supernovae accurately. Here we present an advance on a method for performing generalized K-corrections for Type Ia supernovae which allows us to compare these objects from the UV to near-IR over the redshift range 0<z<2. We discuss the errors currently associated with this method and how future data can improve upon it significantly. We also examine the effects of reddening on the K-corrections and the light curves of Type Ia supernovae. Finally, we provide a few examples of how these techniques affect our current understanding of a sample of both nearby and distant supernovae.
The last five years have seen growing challenges to the traditional paradigm of a core collapse supernova powered by the neutrino emission of a young proto-neutron star. Chief among these challenges are gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) and the supernovae that seem to accompany them. Here we review some recent - and not so recent - models for GRBs and supernovae in which strong magnetic fields, rotation, or accretion into a black hole play a role. The conditions for these energetic explosions are special and, at this point, there is no compelling reason to invoke them in the general case. That is, 99% of supernovae may still operate in the traditional fashion.
New facilities to measure neutrino-nucleus cross sections, such as those possible in conjunction with spallation neutron sources, could provide an experimental foundation for the many neutrino-nucleus weak interaction rates needed in supernova models. This would enable more realistic supernova models and provide a greatly improved ability to understand the physics fundamental to supernovae by comparison of these models with detailed observations. Charged- and neutral-current neutrino interactions on nuclei in the stellar core play a central role in supernova dynamics and nucleosynthesis as well as being important for supernova neutrino detection. Measurements of these reactions on judiciously chosen targets would provide an invaluable test of the complex theoretical models used to compute the large number of neutrino-nucleus cross sections that are needed.
We present the discovery of a red supergiant star that exploded as supernova 2003gd in the nearby spiral galaxy M74. The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) and the Gemini Telescope imaged this galaxy 6 to 9 months before the supernova explosion and subsequent HST images confirm the positional coincidence of the supernova with a single,resolved star which is an 8 +4/-2 solar mass red supergiant. This confirms both stellar evolution models and supernova theories which predict that type II-Plateau supernovae have cool red supergiants as their immediate progenitor stars.
In a 1996 JRO Fellowship Research Proposal (Los Alamos), the author suggested that neutrino oscillations may provide a powerful indirect energy transport mechanism to supernovae explosions. The principal aim of this addendum is to present the relevant unedited text of Section 1 of that proposal. We then briefly remind, (a) of an early suggestion of Mazurek on vacuum neutrino oscillations and their relevance to supernovae explosion, and (b) Wolfenstein's result on suppression of the effect by matter effects. We conclude that whether or not neutrino oscillations play a significant role in supernovae explosions shall depend if there are shells/regions of space in stellar collapse where matter effects play no essential role. Should such regions exist in actual astrophysical situations, the final outcome of neutrino oscillations on supernovae explosions shall depend, in part, on whether or not the LNSD signal is confirmed. Importantly, the reader is reminded that neutrino oscillations form a set of flavor-oscillation clocks and these clock suffer gravitational redshift which can be as large as 20 percent. This effect must be incorporated fully into any calculation of supernova explosion.
The recent discovery of a new population of stars exhibiting unusual elemental abundance patterns characterized by enhanced Ti to Ga elements and low alpha and n-capture elements suggests the contribution of a new class of supernovae, probably a kind of Type Ia supernovae associated with close binary evolution. The role of these supernovae in chemical evolution is negligible in normal galaxies that undergo moderate star formation such as our own. Thus, while the frequency of occurrence would be too low to detect in low-redshift galaxies, it may represent a prominent population in high-redshift objects such as early epoch massive elliptical galaxies and QSOs. The chemical contributor of this proposed type of supernovae in combination with recognized supernovae is shown to be compatible with the recent observational features in the distant universe, successfully reproducing the Type II supernovae-like abundance pattern with enhancement of Ga and Ge in the gas of newborn massive galaxies and high iron abundances in QSOs even at redshifts of around 6.
We present 2D results of simulations of the magnetorotational core collapsed supernova. For the first time we obtain strong explosion for the core collapsed supernova. In 2D approximation we show that amplification of the toroidal magnetic field due to the differential rotation leads to the formation of MHD shockwave, which produces supernova explosion. The amounts of the ejected mass $0.1M_\odot$ and energy $\sim 0.5\div0.6 \cdot 10^{51}$ergs can explain the energy output for supernova type II or type Ib/c explosions. The shape of the explosion is qualitatively depends on the initial configuration of the magnetic field, and may form strong ejection neat the equatorial plane, or produce mildly collimated jets. Our simulation show that during the evolution of the magnetic field the magnetorotational instability appears and leads to exponential growth of the magnetic field strength.
In order to resolve the overproduction problem of 11B in supernova explosions during Galactic chemical evolution, the dependence of the ejected masses of the light elements produced through the nu-process in supernova explosions on supernova neutrino parameters is investigated and constraints on the supernova neutrinos are evaluated. Detailed nucleosynthesis in a supernova explosion model corresponding to SN 1987A is calculated by postprocessing. The ejected masses of 11B and 7Li depend strongly on the temperature of mu- and tau-neutrinos and their antiparticles and are roughly proportional to the total neutrino energy. The range of temperature of mu- and -tau neutrinos and their antiparticles appropriate for the amount of 11B necessary for Galactic chemical evolution and the total neutrino energy deduced from the gravitational energy of a typical neutron star is between 4.8 MeV and 6.6 MeV. In the case of neutrino energy spectra with non-zero chemical potential, this range decreases by about 10%.
Spectropolarimetry of core collapse supernovae has shown that they are asymmetric and often, but not universally, bi-polar. The Type IIb SN1993J and similar events showed large scatter in the Stokes parameter plane. Observational programs clearly have much more to teach us about the complexity of asymmetric supernovae and the physics involved in the asymmetry. Jet-induced supernova models give a typical jet/torus structure that is reminiscent of some objects like the Crab nebula, SN1987A and perhaps Cas A. Jets, in turn, may arise from the intrinsic rotation and magnetic fields that are expected to accompany core collapse. We summarize the potential importance of the magneto-rotational instability for the core collapse problem and sketch some of the effects that large magnetic fields, ~10^{15} G, may have on the physics of the supernova explosion. Open issues in the problem of multi-dimensional magnetic core collapse are summarized and a critique is given of some recent MHD collapse calculations.
The Hubble Ultra Deep Field Survey has not only provided the deepest optical and near infrared views of universe, but has enabled a search for the most distant supernovae to z~2.2. We have found four supernovae by searching spans of integrations of the Ultra Deep Field and the Ultra Deep Field Parallels taken with the Hubble Space Telescope paired with the Advanced Camera for Surveys and the Near Infrared Multi Object Spectrometer. Interestingly, none of these supernovae were at z>1.4, despite the substantially increased sensitivity per unit area to such objects over the Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey. We present the optical photometric data for the four supernovae. We also show that the low frequency of Type Ia supernovae observed at z>1.4 is statistically consistent with current estimates of the global star formation history combined with the non-trivial assembly time of SN Ia progenitors.
The star formation rate (SFR) in starburst galaxies can be measured by many methods, one of which is through the supernova rate. Due to the heavy dust obscuration in these galaxies, searches for new supernovae in the optical or infra-red can easily miss events occurring in the central starburst regions. As part of a long term program to estimate the SFR in a sample of nearby starbursts we are using MERLIN and the VLA to regularly observe the galaxies for new radio supernovae. As part of this project, regular MERLIN observations have been made of two recent optically bright supernovae: 2004dj and 2004et. Both supernovae are of Type II and have been monitored frequently over periods of a few months, resulting in well sampled radio "light" curves for both objects.
I calculate the diffuse flux of electron antineutrinos from all supernovae using the information on the neutrino spectrum from SN987A and the information on the rate of supernovae from direct supernova observations. The interval of flux allowed at 99 % confidence level is 0.05 - 0.35 cm^-2 s ^-1 above the SuperKamiokande (SK) energy cut of 19.3 MeV. This result is at least a factor of 4 smaller than the current SK upper limit of 1.2 cm^-2 s ^-1, thus motivating the experimental efforts to lower the detection energy threshold or to upgrade to higher volumes. A Megaton water Cherenkov detector with 90 % efficiency would record 2 - 44 inverse beta decay events a year depending on the energy cut.
We present results of 2D simulation of magnetorotational (MR) supernova accompanied by jet formation in the core collapse supernova explosion. Initial magnetic field used in the simulations has dipole-like symmetry. Contrary to the simulations of MR supernova with initial quadrupole-like magnetic field, where the matter was ejected mainly near the equatorial plane, in presence of the dipole-like initial magnetic field the supernova explosion is developing preferably along a rotational axis, and leads to formation of a protojet. We expect that protojet propagation through the envelope of the star will be accompanied by its collimation. The magnetorotational instability (MRI) was found in simulations, similar to the earlier considered case of the quadrupole-like initial magnetic field. Our estimations show that the characteristic time for the reconnection of the magnetic field is much larger than the MRI development time. The supernova explosion energy for the dipole-like field is about $0.61\cdot 10^{51}$erg, and about $0.13M_\odot$ of mass was ejected during the explosion.
A new formation scenario for TiC and Fe,Ni-metal inclusions in presolar graphite grains of supernova origin is described. The mineralogy and chemistry require condensation of (Fe,Ni)-titanides from Fe, Ni, and Ti-rich gaseous ejecta, subsequent carburization to make TiC and metal, and encapsulation into graphite. Titanides only condense if Si is depleted relative to heavier mass elements, which requires alpha-rich freeze-out and a deep mass-cut for the supernova ejecta. This Si-poor core material must remain unmixed with other supernova zones until the titanides condensed. This can be accomplished by transport of core ejecta in bipolar jets through the major expanding supernova zone ejecta. If the jets stall in regions dominated by C-rich ejecta such as C-He zone where graphite condenses, thermochemically favored in situ carburization of the titanides - either before or during encapsulation into condensing graphite - leads to a TiC and metal composite. This scenario agrees with theoretical models and observations of asymmetric core collapse in supernovae that are associated with bipolar jets loaded with iron-peak elements.
We examine the utility of very high redshift Type Ia supernovae for cosmology and systematic uncertainty control. Next generation space surveys such as the Supernova/Acceleration Probe (SNAP) will obtain thousands of supernovae at z>1.7, beyond the design redshift for which the supernovae will be exquisitely characterized. We find that any z\gtrsim2 standard candles' use for cosmological parameter estimation is quite modest and subject to pitfalls; we examine gravitational lensing, redshift calibration, and contamination effects in some detail. The very high redshift supernovae - both thermonuclear and core collapse - will provide copious interesting information on star formation, environment, and evolution. However, the new observational systematics that must be faced, as well as the limited expansion of SN-parameter space afforded, does not point to high value for 1.7<z<3 SNe Ia in controlling evolutionary systematics relative to what SNAP can already achieve at z<1.7. Synergy with observations from JWST and thirty meter class telescopes afford rich opportunities for advances throughout astrophysics.
A description of the light curves of microlensed Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) as extended and expanding sources is presented. We give examples of what microlensing by stellar-mass Chang-Refsdal lenses can do to a small percentage of supernova light curves. We find that in addition to overall brightening, significant changes in light--curve shapes can also occur. Peaks can be distorted, plateaus can appear, and even secondary peaks can be formed. The effects of both the relative motion of the lens and the supernova and the expansion of the supernova are given and compared. The effects of relative motion are more pronounced when a distant supernova ($z_s \sim 1$) impacts well within the Einstein ring of a nearby microlens ($z_d \sim 0.05$) and are less important for more distant deflectors. We also find that the increase in shear that comes with increased deflector distance tends to reduce the time variability of microlensing. We briefly discuss the probability of observing these effects.
In this article I will briely review the current status of radio observations of nearby supernovae and their remnants. This review will initially address observations of the radio light curves of nearby core-collapse supernovae, followed by a more detailed summary of recent Very Long Baseline Interferometric observations of the expansion of nearby supernovae and their remnants. These later sections will concentrate on a few sources, namely those found in M82, SN1993J, and the recent supernovae SN2004et. In addition I will discuss the many radio detections of supernovae found in the highly obscured centres of starburst galaxies, such as M82 and Arp220, where no optical detections are possible.
Radio observations of Type Ib/c supernovae suggest that circumstellar interaction takes place with a wide range of wind densities, comparable to that seen in Galactic Wolf-Rayet stars. Efficient production of magnetic field in the shocked region is needed. The X-ray emission observed from some Type Ib/c supernovae is higher than would be expected by the thermal or inverse Compton mechanisms; a synchrotron interpretation requires a flattening of the electron energy spectrum at high energies, as might occur in a cosmic ray dominated shock wave. The wind density variations that are indicated in two supernovae may be due to a binary companion, although variable mass loss from a single star remains a possibility. Other than the optical supernova radiation, the emission from the nearby SN 2006aj/GRB 060218 appears to be powered by a central engine, while that from SN 1998bw/GRB 980425 could be powered by either a central engine or the outer supernova ejecta.
We calculate the predicted UBVRIJHK absolute magnitudes for models of supernova progenitors and apply the result to the case of supernova 2005cs. We agree with previous results that the initial mass of the star was of low, around 6 to 8 M(sun). However such stars are thought to go through second dredge-up to become AGB stars. We show that had this occurred to the progenitor of 2005cs it would have been observed in JHK pre-explosion images. The progenitor was not detected in these bands and therefore we conclude that it was not an AGB star. Furthermore if some AGB stars do produce supernovae they will have a clear signature in pre-explosion near-infrared images. Electron-capture supernovae are thought to occur in AGB stars, hence the implication is that 2005cs was not an electron-capture supernova but was the collapse of an iron core.
We report a supernova discovery in Ks-band images from the NAOS CONICA adaptive optics (AO) system on the ESO Very Large Telescope (VLT). The images were obtained as part of a near-infrared search for highly-obscured supernovae in the nuclear regions of luminous and ultraluminous infrared galaxies. SN 2004ip is located within a circumnuclear starburst at 1.4 arcsec (or 500 pc) projected distance from the K-band nucleus of the luminous infrared galaxy IRAS 18293-3413. The supernova luminosity and light curve are consistent with a core-collapse event suffering from a host galaxy extinction of up to about 40 magnitudes in V-band which is as expected for a circumnuclear starburst environment. This is the first supernova to be discovered making use of AO correction and demonstrates the potential of the current 8-meter class telescopes equipped with AO in discovering supernovae from the innermost nuclear regions of luminous and ultraluminous infrared galaxies.
The question "Are supernovae important sources of dust?" is a contentious one. Observations with the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) and the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) only detected very small amounts of hot dust in supernova remnants. Here, we review observations of two young Galactic remnants with the Submillimetre Common User Bolometer Array (SCUBA), which imply that large quantities of dust are produced by supernovae. The association of dust with the Cassiopeia A remnant is in question due to the contamination of foreground material. In this article, we compare the emission from cold dust with CO emission towards Kepler's supernova remnant. We detect very little CO at the location of the submillimetre peaks. A comparison of masses from the CO and the dust clouds are made, and we estimate the 3 sigma upper limit on the gas-to-dust ratios to range from 25 - 65 suggesting that we cannot yet rule out freshly-formed or swept up circumstellar dust in Kepler's supernova remnant.
A liquid Argon TPC (ICARUS-like) has the ability to detect clean neutrino bursts from type-II supernova collapses. In this paper, we consider for the first time the four possible detectable channels, namely, the elastic scattering on electrons from all neutrino species, $\nu_e$ charged current absorption on $Ar$ with production of excited $K$, $\bar\nu_e$ charged current absorption on $Ar$ with production of excited $Cl$ and neutral current interactions on $Ar$ from all neutrino flavors. We compute the total rates and energy spectra of supernova neutrino events including the effects of the three--flavor neutrino oscillation with matter effects in the propagation in the supernova. Results show a dramatic dependence on the oscillation parameters and in the energy spectrum, especially for charged-current events. The shock breakout phase has also been investigated using recent simulations of the core collapse supernova. We stress the importance of the neutral current signal to decouple supernova from neutrino oscillation physics.
The flavor conversion of supernova neutrinos can lead to observable signatures related to the unknown neutrino parameters. As one of the determinants in dictating the efficiency of resonant flavor conversion, the local density profile near the MSW resonance in a supernova environment is, however, not so well understood. In this analysis, variable power-law functions are adopted to represent the independent local density profiles near the locations of resonance. It is shown that the uncertain matter density profile in a supernova, the possible neutrino mass hierarchies, and the undetermined 1-3 mixing angle would result in six distinct scenarios in terms of the survival probabilities of $\nu_{e}$ and $\bar{\nu_{e}}$. The feasibility of probing the undetermined neutrino mass hierarchy and the 1-3 mixing angle with the supernova neutrinos is then examined using several proposed experimental observables. Given the incomplete knowledge of the supernova matter profile, the analysis is further expanded to incorporate the Earth matter effect. The possible impact due to the choice of models, which differ in the average energy and in the luminosity of neutrinos, is also addressed in the analysis.
Only weakly interacting, neutrinos are the principal messengers reaching us from the center of a supernova. Terrestrial neutrino telescopes, such as SNO and SuperKamiokande, can provide precious information about the processes in the core of a collapsing and exploding star. But the information about the supernova that a neutrino detector can supply, is restricted by the fact that little experimental data on the neutrino-nucleus cross sections exists and by the uncertainties in theoretical calculations. In this letter, we propose a novel procedure that determines the response of a target nucleus in a supernova-neutrino detector directly, by using low-energy beta-beams. We show that fitting 'synthetic' spectra, constructed by taking linear combinations of beta-beam spectra, to the original supernova-neutrino spectra reproduces the folded differential cross sections very accurately. Comparing the response in a terrestrial detector to these synthetic responses provides a direct way to determine the main parameters of the supernova-neutrino energy-distribution.
We estimate the likelihood of direct injection of supernova ejecta into protoplanetary disks using a model in which the number of stars with disks decreases linearly with time, and clusters expand linearly with time such that their surface density is independent of stellar number. The similarity of disk dissipation and main sequence lifetimes implies that the typical supernova progenitor is very massive, ~ 75-100 Msun. Such massive stars are found only in clusters with > 10^4 members. Moreover, there is only a small region around a supernova within which disks can survive the blast yet be enriched to the level observed in the Solar System. These two factors limit the overall likelihood of supernova enrichment of a protoplanetary disk to < 1%. If the presence of short lived radionucleides in meteorites is to be explained in this way, however, the Solar System most likely formed in one of the largest clusters in the Galaxy, more than two orders of magnitude greater than Orion, where multiple supernovae impacted many disks in a short period of time.
We present the results of radio observations, taken primarily with the Very Large Array, of Supernovae 1993J, 2001gd, 2001em, 2002hh, 2004dj, and 2004et. We have fit a parameterized model to the multi-frequency observations of each supernova. We compare the observed and derived radio properties of these supernovae by optical classification and discuss the implications.
The extremely luminous supernova SN 2006gy challenges the traditional view that the collapse of a stellar core is the only mechanism by which a massive star makes a supernova, because it seems too luminous by more than a factor of ten. Here we report that the brightest supernovae in the modern Universe arise from collisions between shells of matter ejected by massive stars that undergo an interior instability arising from the production of electron-positron pairs. This "pair instability" leads to explosive burning that is insufficient to unbind the star, but ejects many solar masses of the envelope. After the first explosion, the remaining core contracts and searches for a stable burning state. When the next explosion occurs, several solar masses of material are again ejected, which collide with the earlier ejecta. This collision can radiate 1E50 erg of light, about a factor of ten more than an ordinary supernova. Our model is in good agreement with the observed light curve for SN 2006gy and also shows that some massive stars can produce more than one supernova-like outburst.
We investigate the signal from supernova relic neutrinos in future large scale observatories, such as MEMPHYS (UNO, Hyper-K), LENA and GLACIER, at present under study. We discuss that complementary information might be gained from the observation of supernova relic electron anti-neutrinos and neutrinos using the scattering on protons on one hand, and on nuclei such as oxygen, carbon or argon on the other hand. When determining the relic neutrino fluxes we also include, for the first time, the coupling of the neutrino magnetic moment to magnetic fields within the core-collapse supernova. We present numerical results on both the relic electron neutrino and anti-neutrino fluxes and on the number of events for electron neutrinos on carbon, oxygen and argon, as well as electron anti-neutrinos on protons, for various oscillation scenarios. The observation of supernova relic neutrinos might provide us with unique information on core-collapse supernova explosions, on the star formation history and on neutrino properties, that still remain unknown.
We discuss results of 2D simulations of magnetorotational(MR) mechanism of core collapse supernova explosions. Due to the nonuniform collapse the collapsed core rotates differentially. In the presence of initial poloidal magnetic field its toroidal component appears and grows with time. Increased magnetic pressure leads to foramtion of compression wave which moves outwards. It transforms into the fast MHD shock wave (supernova shock wave). The shape of the MR supernova explosion qualitatively depends on the configuration of the initial magnetic field. For the dipole-like initial magnetic field the supernova explosion develops mainly along rotational axis forming mildly collimated jet. Quadrupole-like initial magnetic field leads to the explosion developing mainly along equatorial plane. Magnetorotational instability was found in our simulations. The supernova explosion energy is growing with increase of the initial core mass and rotational energy of the core, and corresponds to the observational data.
The extreme luminosity and their fairly unique temporal behaviour have made supernovae a superb tool to measure distances in the universe. As complex astrophysical events they provide interesting insights into explosion physics, explosive nucleosynthesis, hydrodynamics of the explosion and radiation transport. They are an end product of stellar evolution and provide clues to the stellar composition. Since they can be observed at large distances they have become critical probes to further explore astrophysical effects, like dust properties in external galaxies and the star formation history of galaxies. Some of the astrophysics interferes with the cosmological applications of supernovae. The local velocity field, distorted by the gravitational attraction of the local large scale structure, and the reddening law appear at the moment the major limitations in the accuracy with which cosmological parameters can be determined. These absorption effects can introduce a secondary bias into the observations of the distant supernovae, which needs to be carefully evaluated. Supernovae have been used for the measurement of the Hubble constant, i.e. the current expansion rate of the universe, and the accelerated cosmic expansion directly inferred from the apparent faintness of the distant supernovae.
We discuss the possibility to identify anisotropic and/or inhomogeneous cosmological models using type Ia supernova data. A search for correlations in current type Ia peak magnitudes over a large range of angular scales yields a null result. However, the same analysis limited to supernovae at low redshift, shows a feeble anticorrelation at the two sigma level at angular scales of about 40 degrees. Upcoming data from, e.g., the SNLS (Supernova Legacy Survey) and the SDSS-II (SDSS: Sloan Digital Sky Survey) supernova searches will improve our limits on the size of - or possibly detect - possible correlations also at high redshift at the per cent level in the near future. With data from the proposed SNAP (SuperNova Acceleration Probe) satellite, we will be able to detect the induced correlations from gravitational lensing on type Ia peak magnitudes on scales less than a degree.
We study the ejecta chemistry of a zero-metallicity progenitor, massive, supernova using a novel approach based on chemical kinetics. Species considered span the range of simple, di-atomic molecules such as CO or SiO to more complex species involved in dust nucleation processes. We describe their formation from the gas phase including all possible relevant chemical processes and apply it to the ejecta of a primordial 170 Msun supernova. Two ejecta cases are explored: full mixing of the heavy elements, and a stratified ejecta reflecting the progenitor nucleosynthesis. Penetration of hydrogen from the progenitor envelope is considered. We show that molecules form very efficiently in the ejecta of primordial supernovae whatever the level of mixing and account for 13 to 34% of the total progenitor mass, equivalent to 21 to 57 Msun of the ejecta material in molecular form. The chemical nature of molecules depends on mixing of heavy elements and hydrogen in the ejecta. Species produced include O2, CO, CO2, SiS, SO, SiO and H2. Consequently, molecules can be used as observational tracers of supernova mixing after explosion. We conclude that primordial massive supernovae are the first molecule providers to the early universe.
The use of Type Ia supernovae as distance indicators led to the discovery of the accelerating expansion of the universe a decade ago. Now that large second generation surveys have significantly increased the size and quality of the high-redshift sample, the cosmological constraints are limited by the currently available sample of ~50 cosmologically useful nearby supernovae. The Nearby Supernova Factory addresses this problem by discovering nearby supernovae and observing their spectrophotometric time development. Our data sample includes over 2400 spectra from spectral timeseries of 185 supernovae. This talk presents results from a portion of this sample including a Hubble diagram (relative distance vs. redshift) and a description of some analyses using this rich dataset.
There have been attempts to fit the abundance patterns of extremely metal-poor stars with supernova nucleosynthesis models for the lighter elements than Zn. On the other hand, observations have revealed that the presence of EMP stars with peculiarly high ratio of "weak r-process elements" Sr, Y and Zr. Although several possible processes were suggested for the origin of these elements, the complete solution for reproducing those ratios is not found yet. In order to reproduce the abundance patterns of such stars, we investigate a model with neutron rich matter ejection from the inner region of the conventional mass-cut. We find that explosive nucleosynthesis in a high energy supernova (or "hypernova") can reproduce the high abundances of Sr, Y and Zr but that the enhancements of Sr, Y and Zr are not achieved by nucleosynthesis in a normal supernova. Our results imply that, if these elements are ejected from a normal supernova, nucleosynthesis in higher entropy flow than that of the supernova shock is required.
Astronomers have proposed a number of mechanisms to produce supernova explosions. Although many of these mechanisms are now not considered primary engines behind supernovae, they do produce transients that will be observed by upcoming ground-based surveys and NASA satellites. Here we present the first radiation-hydrodynamics calculations of the spectra and light curves from three of these "failed" supernovae: supernovae with considerable fallback, accretion induced collapse of white dwarfs, and energetic helium flashes (also known as type .Ia supernovae).
The classic example of a Type IIb supernova is SN 1993J, which had a cool extended progenitor surrounded by a dense wind. There is evidence for another category of Type IIb supernova which has a more compact progenitor with a lower density, probably fast, wind. Distinguishing features of the compact category are: weak optical emission from the shock heated envelope at early times; nonexistent or very weak H emission in the late nebular phase; rapidly evolving radio emission; rapid expansion of the radio shell; and expected nonthermal as opposed to thermal X-ray emission. Type IIb supernovae that have one or more of these features include SNe 1996cb, 2001ig, 2003bg, 2008ax, and 2008bo. All of these with sufficient radio data (the last four) show evidence for presupernova wind variability. We estimate a progenitor envelope radius ~1e11 cm for SN 2008ax, a value consistent with a compact Wolf-Rayet progenitor. Supernovae in the SN 1993J extended category include SN 2001gd and probably the Cas A supernova. We suggest that the compact Type IIb events be designated Type cIIb and the extended ones Type eIIb. The H envelope mass dividing these categories is ~0.1 Msun.
Electrons and electron neutrinos in the inner core of the core-collapse supernova are highly degenerate and therefore numerous during a few seconds of explosion. In contrast, leptons of other flavors are non-degenerate and therefore relatively scarce. This is due to lepton flavor conservation. If this conservation law is broken by some non-standard interactions, electron neutrinos are converted to muon and tau-neutrinos, and electrons - to muons. This affects the supernova dynamics and the supernova neutrino signal. We consider lepton flavor violating interactions mediated by scalar bileptons, i.e. heavy scalars with lepton number 2. It is shown that in case of TeV-mass bileptons the electron fermi gas is equilibrated with non-electron species inside the inner supernova core at a time-scale of order of (1-100) ms. In particular, a scalar triplet which generates neutrino masses through the see-saw type II mechanism is considered. It is found that supernova core is sensitive to yet unprobed values of masses and couplings of the triplet.
We present the first near infrared Hubble diagram for type II-P supernovae to further explore their value as distance indicators. We use a modified version of the standardised candle method which relies on the tight correlation between the absolute magnitudes of type II-P supernovae and their expansion velocities during the plateau phase. Although our sample contains only 12 II-P supernovae and they are necessarily local (z < 0.02), we demonstrate using near infrared JHK photometry that it may be possible to reduce the scatter in the Hubble diagram to 0.1-0.15 magnitudes. While this is potentially similar to the dispersion seen for type Ia supernovae, we caution that this needs to be confirmed with a larger sample of II-P supernovae in the Hubble flow.
We study the effect of filter zero-point uncertainties on future supernova dark energy missions. Fitting for calibration parameters using simultaneous analysis of all Type Ia supernova standard candles achieves a significant improvement over more traditional fit methods. This conclusion is robust under diverse experimental configurations (number of observed supernovae, maximum survey redshift, inclusion of additional systematics). This approach to supernova fitting considerably eases otherwise stringent mission calibration requirements. As an example we simulate a space-based mission based on the proposed JDEM satellite; however the method and conclusions are general and valid for any future supernova dark energy mission, ground or space-based.
Spectroscopic analyses of Type Ia supernovae have shown there exist four spectroscopic groups---cools, broad line, shallow silicon, and core normal---defined by the widths of the Si II features at 5972 Angstroms and 6355 Angstroms. 1991bg-likes are classified as "cools". Cools are dim, undergo a rapid decline in luminosity, and produce significantly less nickel than normal Type Ia supernovae. They also have an unusually deep and wide trough in their spectra around 4200 Angstroms and a relatively strong Si II absorption attributed to the line at 5972 Angstroms. We examine the spectra of supernova (SN) 1991bg and the cools SN 1997cn, SN 1999by, and SN 2005bl using the highly parameterized synthetic spectrum code SYNOW, and find general agreement with similar spectroscopic studies. Our analysis reveals that this group of supernovae is fairly homogeneous, with many of the blue spectral features well fit by Fe II. The nature of the spectroscopic commonalities and the variations in the class are discussed. Finally, we examine intermediates such as SN 2004eo and discuss the spectroscopic subgroup distribution of Type Ia supernovae.
We present numerical models for supernova remnant evolution, using a new version of the hydrodynamical code SUPREMNA. We added cosmic ray diffusion equation to the code scheme, employing two-fluid approximation. We investigate the dynamics of the simulated supernova remnants with different values of cosmic ray acceleration efficiency and diffusion coefficient. We compare the numerical models with observational data of Tycho's and SN1006 supernova remnants. We find models which reproduce the observed locations of the blast wave, contact discontinuity, and reverse shock for the both remnants, thus allowing us to estimate the contribution of cosmic ray particles into total pressure and cosmic-ray energy losses in these supernova remnants. We derive that the energy losses due to cosmic rays escape in Tycho's supernova remnant are 10-20% of the kinetic energy flux and 20-50% in SN1006.
The first molecules detected at infrared wavelengths in the ejecta of a Type II supernova, namely SN1987A, consisted of CO and SiO. Since then, confirmation of the formation of these two species in several other supernovae a few hundred days after explosion has been obtained. However, supernova environments appear to hamper the synthesis of large, complex species due to the lack of microscopically-mixed hydrogen deep in supernova cores. Because these environments also form carbon and silicate dust, it is of importance to understand the role played by molecules in the depletion of elements and how chemical species get incorporated into dust grains. In the present paper, we review our current knowledge of the molecular component of supernova ejecta, and present new trends and results on the synthesis of molecules in these harsh, explosive events.
We present a result of X-ray supernovae (SNe) survey using the Swift satellite public archive. An automatic searching program was designed to search X-ray SNe among all of the Swift archival observations between November 2004 and February 2011. Using the C++ program, 24 X-ray detectable supernovae have been found in the archive and 3 of them were newly-discovered in X-rays which are SN 1986L, SN 2003lx, and SN 2007od. In addition, SN 2003lx is a Type Ia supernova which may be the second X-ray detectable Type Ia after SN 2005ke (Immler et al. 2006). Calibrated data of luminous type Ib/c supernovae was consistent to the X-ray emission model done by Chevalier & Fransson (1994). Statistics about the luminosities and hardness ratio have been done to purpose of getting the X-ray emission features of the X-ray supernovae. The results from this work help investigating the X-ray evolution of SNe and developing similar X-ray SNe surveys in various X-rays missions.
Although Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) play very important roles in many astrophysical fields, the exact nature of the progenitors of SNe Ia is still unclear. At present, the single degenerate (SD) model is a very likely one. Following the comprehensive SD model developed by Meng & Yang (2010), we show the properties of SNe Ia companions at the moment of the supernova explosion. The results may provide help in searching for companion stars in supernova remnants. We compared our results with the companion candidate Tycho G of Tycho's supernova and found that integral properties of the star (mass, space velocity, radius, luminosity and effective temperature) are all consistent with those predicted from our SD model with the exception of the rotational velocity. If Tycho G was the companion star of Tycho's supernova, an interaction between supernova ejecta and the rotational companion might be a key factor to solve the confliction, and then it could be encouraged to do a detailed numerical simulation about the interaction.
An enhanced concentration of 60Fe was found in a deep ocean's crust in 2004 in a layer corresponding to an age of ~2 Myr. The confirmation of this signal in terrestrial archives as supernova-induced and detection of other supernova-produced radionuclides is of great interest. We have identified two suitable marine sediment cores from the South Australian Basin and estimated the intensity of a possible signal of the supernova-produced radionuclides 26Al, 53Mn, 60Fe and the pure r-process element 244Pu in these cores. A finding of these radionuclides in a sediment core might allow to improve the time resolution of the signal and thus to link the signal to a supernova event in the solar vicinity ~2 Myr ago. Furthermore, it gives an insight on nucleosynthesis scenarios in massive stars, the condensation into dust grains and transport mechanisms from the supernova shell into the solar system.
Prospects for future supernova surveys are discussed, focusing on the ESA Euclid mission and the European Extremely Large Telescope(E-ELT), both expected to be in operation around the turn of the decade. Euclid is a 1.2m space survey telescope that will operate at visible and near-infrared wavelengths, and has the potential to find and obtain multi-band lightcurves for thousands of distant supernovae. The E-ELT is a planned general-purpose ground-based 40m-class optical-IR telescope with adaptive optics built in, which will be capable of obtaining spectra of Type Ia supernovae to redshifts of at least four. The contribution to supernova cosmology with these facilities will be discussed in the context of other future supernova programs such as those proposed for DES, JWST, LSST and WFIRST.
In view of the advent of large-scale neutrino detectors such as IceCube, the future Hyper-Kamiokande and the ones proposed for the Laguna project in Europe, we re-examine the determination of the directional position of a Galactic supernova by means of its neutrinos using the triangulation method. We study the dependence of the pointing accuracy on the arrival time resolution of supernova neutrinos at different detectors. For a failed supernova, we expect better results due to the abrupt termination of the neutrino emission which allows one to measure the arrival time with higher precision. We found that for the time resolution of $\pm$ 2 (4) ms, the supernova can be located with a precision of $\sim$ 5 (10)$^\circ$ on the declination and of $\sim$ 8 (15)$^\circ$ on the right ascension angle, if we combine the observations from detectors at four different sites.
Providing an early warning of a galactic supernova using neutrino signals is of importance in studying both supernova dynamics and neutrino physics. The Daya Bay reactor neutrino experiment, with a unique feature of multiple liquid scintillator detectors separated in space, is sensitive to the full energy spectrum of supernova burst electron-antineutrinos. By deploying 8 Antineutrino Detectors (ADs) in three different experimental halls, we obtain a more powerful and prompt rejection of muon spallation background than single-detector experiments. A dedicated supernova online trigger system embedded in the data acquisition system has been installed to allow the detection of a coincidence of neutrino signals within a 10-second window, thus providing a robust early warning of a supernova occurrence within the Milky Way.
Although Type Ia supernovae have been heavily scrutinized due to their use in making cosmological distance estimates, we are still unable to definitively identify the progenitors for the entire population. While answers have been presented for certain specific systems, a complete solution remains elusive. We present observations of two supernova remnants (SNRs) in the Large Magellanic Cloud, SNR 0505-67.9 and SNR 0509-68.7, for which we have identified the center of the remnant and the 99.73% containment central region in which any companion star left over after the supernova must be located. Both remnants have a number of potential ex-companion stars near their centers; all possible single and double degenerate progenitor models remain viable for these two supernovae. Future observations may be able to identify the true ex-companions for both remnants.
In this paper we report on the bulk features of the hole carved by the companion star in the material ejected during a Type Ia supernova explosion. In particular we are interested in the long term evolution of the hole as well as in its fingerprint in the geometry of the supernova remnant after several centuries of evolution, which is a hot topic in current Type Iasupernovae studies. We use an axisymmetric smoothed particle hydrodynamics code to characterize the geometric properties of the supernova remnant resulting from the interaction of this ejected material with the ambient medium. Our aim is to use supernova remnant observations to constrain the single degenerate scenario for Type Ia supernova progenitors. Our simulations show that the hole will remain open during centuries, although its partial or total closure at later times due to hydrodynamic instabilities is not excluded. Close to the edge of the hole, the Rayleigh-Taylor instability grows faster, leading to plumes that approach the edge of the forward shock. We also discuss other geometrical properties of the simulations, like the evolution of the contact discontinuity.
The result of a search for neutrino bursts from supernova explosions using the Super-Kamiokande detector is reported. Super-Kamiokande is sensitive to core-collapse supernova explosions via observation of their neutrino emissions. The expected number of events comprising such a burst is ~10^4 and the average energy of the neutrinos is in few tens of MeV range in the case of a core-collapse supernova explosion at the typical distance in our galaxy (10 kiloparsecs); this large signal means that the detection efficiency anywhere within our galaxy and well past the Magellanic Clouds is 100%. We examined a data set which was taken from May, 1996 to July, 2001 and from December, 2002 to October, 2005 corresponding to 2589.2 live days. However, there is no evidence of such a supernova explosion during the data-taking period. The 90% C.L. upper limit on the rate of core-collapse supernova explosions out to distances of 100 kiloparsecs is found to be 0.32 SN/year.
Cassiopeia A is one of the youngest supernova remnants known in the Milky Way and a unique laboratory for supernova physics. We present an optical spectrum of the Cassiopeia A supernova near maximum brightness, obtained from observations of a scattered light echo - more than three centuries after the direct light of the explosion swept past Earth. The spectrum shows that Cassiopeia A was a type IIb supernova and originated from the collapse of the helium core of a red supergiant that had lost most of its hydrogen envelope prior to exploding. Our finding concludes a longstanding debate on the Cassiopeia A progenitor and provides new insight into supernova physics by linking the properties of the explosion to the wealth of knowledge about its remnant.
Type Ia supernovae result when carbon-oxygen white dwarfs in binary systems accrete mass from companion stars, reach a critical mass, and explode. The near uniformity of their light curves makes these supernovae good standard candles for measuring cosmic expansion, but a correction must be applied to account for the fact that the brighter supernovae have broader light curves. One-dimensional modelling, with a certain choice of parameters, can reproduce this general trend in the width-luminosity relation, but the processes of ignition and detonation have recently been shown to be intrinsically asymmetric. Here we report on multi-dimensional modelling of the explosion physics and radiative transfer that reveals that the breaking of spherical symmetry is a critical factor in determining both the width luminosity relation and the observed scatter about it. The deviation from sphericity can also explain the finite polarization detected in the light from some supernovae. The slope and normalization of the width-luminosity relation has a weak dependence on certain properties of the white dwarf progenitor, in particular the trace abundances of elements other than carbon and oxygen. Failing to correct for this effect could lead to systematic overestimates of up to 2% in the distance to remote supernovae.
Supernova explosions are among the most energetic phenomena in the known universe. There are suggestions that cosmic rays up to EeV energies might be accelerated in the young supernova shell on time scales of a few weeks to years, which would lead to TeV neutrino radiation. The data taken with the AMANDA neutrino telescope in the years 2000 to 2006 is analysed with a likelihood approach in order to search for directional and temporal coincidences between neutrino events and optically observed extra-galactic supernovae. The supernovae were stacked in order to enhance the sensitivity. A catalogue of relevant core-collapse supernovae has been created. This poster presents the results from the analysis.
Supernovae are the most energetic stellar events and influence the interstellar medium by their gasdynamics and energetics. By this, both also affect the star formation positively and negatively. In this paper, we review the complexity of investigations aiming at understanding the interchange between supernova explosions with the star-forming molecular clouds. Commencing from analytical studies the paper advances to numerical models of supernova feedback from superbubble scales to galaxy structure. We also discuss parametrizations of star-formation and supernova-energy transfer efficiencies. Since evolutionary models from the interstellar medium to galaxies are numerous and are applying multiple recipes of these parameters, only a representative selection of studies can be discussed here.
We present a revised lens model of MACS J1149+2223, in which the first resolved multiply-imaged lensed supernova was discovered. The lens model is based on the model of Johnson et al. (2014) with some modifications. We include more lensing constraints from the host galaxy of the newly discovered supernova, and increase the flexibility of the model in order to better reproduce the lensing signal in the vicinity of this galaxy. The revised model accurately reconstructs the positions of the lensed supernova, provides magnifications, and predicts the time delay between the instances of the supernova. Finally, we reconstruct the source image of the host galaxy, and position the supernova on one of its spiral arms. Products of this lens model are available to the community through MAST.
SN2014J is the closest supernova of type Ia that occured in the last 40 years. This provides an opportunity for unprecedented observational detail and coverage in many astronomical bands, which will help to better understand the still unknown astrophysics of these supernovae. For the first time, such an event occurs sufficiently nearby so that also gamma rays are able to contribute to such investigations. This is important, as the primary source of the supernova light is the radioactive energy from about 0.5 M$_\odot$ of $^{56}$Ni produced in the explosion, and the gamma rays associated with this decay make the supernova shine for months. The INTEGRAL gamma-ray observatory of ESA has followed the supernova emission for almost 5 months. The characteristic gamma ray lines from the $^{56}$Ni decay chain through $^{56}$Co to $^{56}$Fe have been measured. We discuss these observations, and the implications of the measured gamma-ray line characteristics as they evolve.
After considering the supernova shock effects, the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein effects, the neutrino collective effects, and the Earth matter effects, the detection of supernova neutrinos at China Spallation Neutron Sources is studied and the event numbers of different flavor supernova neutrinos observed through various reaction channels are calculated with the neutrino energy spectra described by the Fermi-Dirac distribution and "beta fit" distribution respectively. Furthermore, the numerical calculation method of supernova neutrino detection on the Earth is applied to some other spallation neutron sources, and the total event numbers of supernova neutrinos observed through different reactions channels are given.
With new observational facilities becoming available soon, discovering and characterising supernovae from the first stars will open up alternative observational windows to the end of the cosmic dark ages. Based on a semi-analytical merger tree model of early star formation we constrain Population III supernova rates. We find that our method reproduces the Population III supernova rates of large-scale cosmological simulations very well. Our computationally efficient model allows us to survey a large parameter space and to explore a wide range of different scenarios for Population III star formation. Our calculations show that observations of the first supernovae can be used to differentiate between cold and warm dark matter models and to constrain the corresponding particle mass of the latter. Our predictions can also be used to optimize survey strategies with the goal to maximize supernova detection rates.
Rapidly rotating, strongly magnetized neutron stars (magnetars) can release their enormous rotational energy via magnetic spin-down, providing a power source for bright transients such as superluminous supernovae. On the other hand, particularly massive (so-called supramassive) neutron stars require a minimum rotation rate to support their mass against gravitational collapse, below which the neutron star collapses to a black hole. We model the light curves of supernovae powered by magnetars which transform into black holes. Although the peak luminosities can reach high values in the range of superluminous supernovae, their post maximum light curves can decline very rapidly because of the sudden loss of the central energy input. Early black hole transformation also enhances the shock breakout signal from the magnetar-driven bubble relative to the main supernova peak. Our synthetic light curves of supernovae powered by magnetars transforming to black holes are consistent with those of some rapidly evolving bright transients recently reported by Arcavi et al. (2016).
This paper is dedicated to the discovery of one of the most important relationships in supernova cosmology - the relation between the peak luminosity of Type Ia supernovae and their luminosity decline rate after maximum light. The history of this relationship is quite long and interesting. The relationship was independently discovered by the American statistician and astronomer Bert Woodard Rust and the Soviet astronomer Yury Pavlovich Pskovskii in the 1970s. Using a limited sample of Type I supernovae they were able to show that the brighter the supernova is, the slower its luminosity declines after maximum. Only with the appearance of CCD cameras could Mark Phillips re-inspect this relationship on a new level of accuracy using a better sample of supernovae. His investigations confirmed the idea proposed earlier by Rust and Pskovskii.
The final evolution of stars in the mass range 70 - 140 solar masses is explored. Depending upon their mass loss history and rotation rates, these stars will end their lives as pulsational pair-instability supernovae producing a great variety of observational transients with total durations ranging from weeks to millennia and luminosities from 10$^{41}$ to over 10$^{44}$ erg s$^{-1}$. No non-rotating model radiates more than $5 \times 10^{50}$ erg of light or has a kinetic energy exceeding $5 \times 10^{51}$ erg, but greater energies are possible, in principle, in magnetar-powered explosions which are explored. Many events resemble Type Ibn, Icn, and IIn supernovae, and some potential observational counterparts are mentioned. Some PPISN can exist in a dormant state for extended periods, producing explosions millennia after their first violent pulse. These dormant supernovae contain bright Wolf-Rayet stars, possibly embedded in bright x-ray and radio sources. The relevance of PPISN to supernova impostors like Eta Carinae, to super-luminous supernovae, and to sources of gravitational radiation is discussed. No black holes between 52 and 133 solar masses are expected from stellar evolution in close binaries.
About 4.6 billion years ago, some event disturbed a cloud of gas and dust, triggering the gravitational collapse that led to the formation of the solar system. A core-collapse supernova, whose shock wave is capable of compressing such a cloud, is an obvious candidate for the initiating event. This hypothesis can be tested because supernovae also produce telltale patterns of short-lived radionuclides, which would be preserved today as isotopic anomalies. Previous studies of the forensic evidence have been inconclusive, finding a pattern of isotopes differing from that produced in conventional supernova models. Here we argue that these difficulties either do not arise or are mitigated if the initiating supernova was a special type, low in mass and explosion energy. Key to our conclusion is the demonstration that short-lived Be-10 can be readily synthesized in such supernovae by neutrino interactions, while anomalies in stable isotopes are suppressed.
When supernovae enter the nebular phase after a few months, they reveal spectral fingerprints of their deep interiors, glowing by radioactivity produced in the explosion. We are given a unique opportunity to see what an exploded star looks like inside. The line profiles and luminosities encode information about physical conditions, explosive and hydrostatic nucleosynthesis, and ejecta morphology, which link to the progenitor properties and the explosion mechanism. Here, the fundamental properties of spectral formation of supernovae in the nebular phase are reviewed. The formalism between ejecta morphology and line profile shapes is derived, including effects of scattering and absorption. Line luminosity expressions are derived in various physical limits, with examples of applications from the literature. The physical processes at work in the supernova ejecta, including gamma-ray deposition, non-thermal electron degradation, ionization and excitation, and radiative transfer are described and linked to the computation and application of advanced spectral models. Some of the results derived so far from nebular-phase supernova analysis are discussed.
Magnetar-powered supernova explosions are competitive models for explaining very luminous optical transits. However, these explosion models were mainly calculated in 1D. Radiation emitted from the magnetar snowplows into the previous supernovae ejecta and causes a nonphysical dense shell (spike) found in previous 1D studies. This suggests that strong fluid instabilities may have developed within the magnetar-powered supernovae. Such fluid instabilities emerge at the region where luminous transits later occur, so they can affect the consequent observational signatures. We examine the magnetar-powered supernovae with 2D hydrodynamics simulations and find that the 1D dense shell transforms into the development of Rayleigh-Taylor and thin shell instabilities in 2D. The resulting mixing is able to fragment the entire shell and break the spherical symmetry of supernovae ejecta.
Observations in all electromagnetic bands show that many supernova remnants (SNRs) have a very aspherical shape. This can be the result of asymmetries in the supernova explosion or a clumpy circumstellar medium. We study the generation of inhomogeneities and the mixing of elements arising from these two sources in multidimensional hydrodynamic simulations of the propagation of a supernova blast wave into a cloudy environment. We model a specific SNR, Vela Jr (RX J0852.0-4622). By comparing our results with recent observations, we can constrain the properties of the explosion. We find that a very energetic explosion of several 10^{51} erg occurring roughly about 800 years ago is consistent with the shape and emission of the SNR, as well as a supernova with an energy closer to the canonical value of 10^{51} erg a few thousand years ago.
Providing an early warning of galactic supernova explosions from neutrino signals is important in studying supernova dynamics and neutrino physics. A dedicated supernova trigger system has been designed and installed in the data acquisition system at Daya Bay and integrated into the worldwide Supernova Early Warning System (SNEWS). Daya Bay's unique feature of eight identically-designed detectors deployed in three separate experimental halls makes the trigger system naturally robust against cosmogenic backgrounds, enabling a prompt analysis of online triggers and a tight control of the false-alert rate. The trigger system is estimated to be fully sensitive to 1987A-type supernova bursts throughout most of the Milky Way. The significant gain in sensitivity of the eight-detector configuration over a mass-equivalent single detector is also estimated. The experience of this online trigger system is applicable to future projects with spatially distributed detectors.
A model of a supernova explosion inside a dense extended hydrogenless envelope is proposed to explain the properties of the light curve for one of the superluminous supernovae PTF12dam. It is argued in the literature that the flux of this supernova rises too fast to be explained by the explosion model due to the instability associated with the electron-positron pair production (pair-instability supernova, PISNe), but it is well described by the models with energy input by a magnetar. We show that the PTF12dam-type supernovae can be explained without a magnetar in a model with a radiative shock in a dense circumstellar envelope that does not require an excessively large explosion energy.
The neutrino burst from a core-collapse supernova can provide information about the star explosion mechanism and the mechanisms of proto neutron star cooling but also about the intrinsic properties of the neutrino such as flavor oscillations. One important question is to understand to which extent can the supernova and the neutrino physics be decoupled in the observation of a single supernova. The capabilities of present and future large underground neutrino detectors to yield information about the time and flavor dependent neutrino signal from a future galactic supernova are described in this paper. Neutrinos from past cosmic supernovae are also observable and their detection will improve our knowledge of the core-collapse rates and average neutrino emission. A comparison between the different experimental techniques is included.
Type Ia supernovae are associated with thermonuclear explosions of white dwarf stars. Combustion processes convert material in nuclear reactions and release the energy required to explode the stars. At the same time, they produce the radioactive species that power radiation and give rise to the formation of the observables. Therefore, the physical mechanism of the combustion processes, as reviewed here, is the key to understand these astrophysical events. Theory establishes two distinct modes of propagation for combustion fronts: subsonic deflagrations and supersonic detonations. Both are assumed to play an important role in thermonuclear supernovae. The physical nature and theoretical models of deflagrations and detonations are discussed together with numerical implementations. A particular challenge arises due to the wide range of spatial scales involved in these phenomena. Neither the combustion waves nor their interaction with fluid flow and instabilities can be directly resolved in simulations. Substantial modeling effort is required to consistently capture such effects and the corresponding techniques are discussed in detail. They form the basis of modern multidimensional hydrodynamical simulations of thermonuclear supernova explosions. The problem of deflagration-to-detonation transitions in thermonuclear supernova explosions is briefly mentioned.
It has been proposed that an intermediate mass black hole can produce compact molecular clouds with large velocity dispersions. This model is called into question due to the discovery of several such short lived clouds, which suggests they are common, and hence it is unlikely that their formation involves an exotic object such as an intermediate mass black hole. In this paper we propose an alternative model, where supernovae produce such clouds. We apply our model to a such a cloud called CO-0.40-0.22. A previous work pointed out the fact that the kinetic energy of this cloud is comparable to that from a supernova, but disqualified the supernova scenario due to lack of thermal emission. We explain the lack of thermal emission as a consequence of the large density of the medium. In such a medium, the supernova shock is radiation dominated, and hence the initial temperatures are lower by many orders of magnitude compared with a typical supernova. Finally, we discuss some of the consequences of having a significant population of intermediate mass black holes in the galactic centre.
Future neutrino detectors will obtain high-statistics data from a nearby core-collapse supernova. We study the mixing with eV-mass sterile neutrinos in a supernova environment and its effects on the active neutrino fluxes as detected by Hyper-Kamiokande and IceCube. Using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo analysis, we make projections for how accurately these experiments will measure the active-sterile mixing angle $\theta_s$ given that there are substantial uncertainties on the expected luminosity and spectrum of active neutrinos from a galactic supernova burst. We find that Hyper-Kamiokande can reconstruct the sterile neutrino mixing and mass in many different situations, provided the neutrino luminosity of the supernova is known precisely. Crucially, we identify a degeneracy between the mixing angle and the overall neutrino luminosity of the supernova. This means that it will only be possible to determine the luminosity if the presence of sterile neutrinos with $\theta_s \gtrsim 0.1$ degrees can be ruled out independently. We discuss ways in which this degeneracy may be broken in the future.
We have found that individual presolar silicon carbide (SiC) dust grains from supernovae show a positive correlation between 49Ti and 28Si excesses, which is attributed to the radioactive decay of the short-lived (t1/2=330 day) 49V to 49Ti in the inner highly 28Si-rich Si/S zone. The 49V-49Ti chronometer constrains that these supernova SiC dust grains formed at least two years after their parent stars exploded. This result supports recent dust condensation calculations that predict a delayed formation of carbonaceous and SiC grains in supernovae. The astronomical observation of continuous buildup of dust in supernovae over several years can, therefore, be interpreted as a growing addition of C-rich dust to the dust reservoir in supernovae.
We give a brief review of the origin and acceleration of cosmic rays (CRs), emphasizing the production of CRs at different stages of supernova evolution by the first-order Fermi shock acceleration mechanism. We suggest that supernovae with trans-relativistic outflows, despite being rather rare, may accelerate CRs to energies above 10$^{18}$ eV over the first year of their evolution. Supernovae in young compact clusters of massive stars, and interaction powered superluminous supernovae, may accelerate CRs well above the PeV regime. We discuss the acceleration of the bulk of the galactic CRs in isolated supernova remnants and re-acceleration of escaped CRs by the multiple shocks present in superbubbles produced by associations of OB stars. The effects of magnetic field amplification by CR driven instabilities, as well as superdiffusive CR transport, are discussed for nonthermal radiation produced by nonlinear shocks of all speeds including trans-relativistic ones.
Superluminous supernovae are a new class of supernovae that were recognized about a decade ago. Both observational and theoretical progress has been significant in the last decade. In this review, we first briefly summarize the observational properties of superluminous supernovae. We then introduce the three major suggested luminosity sources to explain the huge luminosities of superluminous supernovae, i.e., the nuclear decay of 56Ni, the interaction between supernova ejecta and dense circumstellar media, and the spin down of magnetars. We compare these models and discuss their strengths and weaknesses.
It has recently been proposed that gravitationally lensed type-Ia supernovae can provide microlensing-free time-delay measurements provided that the measurement is taken during the achromatic expansion phase of the explosion and that color light curves are used rather than single-band light curves. If verified, this would provide both precise and accurate time-delay measurements, making lensed type-Ia supernovae a new golden standard for time-delay cosmography. However, the 3D geometry of the expanding shell can introduce an additional bias that has not yet been fully explored. In this work, we present and discuss the impact of this effect on time-delay cosmography with lensed supernovae and find that on average it leads to a bias of a few tenths of a day for individual lensed systems. This is negligible in view of the cosmological time delays predicted for typical lensed type-Ia supernovae but not for the specific case of the recently discovered type-Ia supernova iPTF16geu, whose time delays are expected to be smaller than a day.
We present improved photometric supernovae classification using deep recurrent neural networks. The main improvements over previous work are (i) the introduction of a time gate in the recurrent cell that uses the observational time as an input; (ii) greatly increased data augmentation including time translation, addition of Gaussian noise and early truncation of the lightcurve. For post Supernovae Photometric Classification Challenge (SPCC) data, using a training fraction of $5.2\%$ (1103 supernovae) of a representational dataset, we obtain a type Ia vs. non type Ia classification accuracy of $93.2 \pm 0.1\%$, a Receiver Operating Characteristic curve AUC of $0.980 \pm 0.002$ and a SPCC figure-of-merit of $F_1=0.57 \pm 0.01$. Using a representational dataset of $50\%$ ($10660$ supernovae), we obtain a classification accuracy of $96.6 \pm 0.1\%$, an AUC of $0.995 \pm 0.001$ and $F_1=0.76 \pm 0.01$. We found the non-representational training set of the SPCC resulted in a large degradation in performance due to a lack of faint supernovae, but this can be migrated by the introduction of only a small number ($\sim 100$) of faint training samples. We also outline ways in which this could be achieved using unsupervised domain adaptation.
Cassiopeia A, one of the most intriguing galactic supernova remnants, has been a target of many observational efforts including most recent observations by ALMA, Hubble, Herschel, Spitzer, NuSTAR, Integral, and other observatories. We use recent gamma-ray lines observations of the radioactive products of Cas A supernova explosive nucleosynthesis as well as spectral energy densities derived for Cas A at infrared wavelengths to speculate about the possibility of radioactive 44Ti being locked into large dust grains. This suggestion is also supported by the possible observation of a pre-supernova outburst about 80 years before the actual Cas A supernova explosion in 1671 AD by Italian astronomer G.D. Cassini. The plausibility of such a scenario is discussed also with reference to recent supernovae, and to the contribution of core-collapse supernovae to the overall dust production in the Galaxy.
The production of the radioactive isotopes $^{44}$Ti and $^{60}$Co in all types of supernovae is examined and compared to observational constraints including Galactic $\gamma$--ray surveys, measurements of the diffuse 511 keV radiation, $\gamma$--ray observations of Cas A, the late time light curve of SN 1987A, and isotopic anomalies found in silicon carbide grains in meteorites. The (revised) line flux from $^{44}$Ti decay in the Cas A supernova remnant reported by COMPTEL on the Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory is near the upper bound expected from our models. The necessary concurrent ejection of $^{56}$Ni would also imply that Cas A was a brighter supernova than previously thought unless extinction in the intervening matter was very large. Thus, if confirmed, the reported amount of $^{44}$Ti in Cas A provides very interesting constraints on both the supernova environment and its mechanism. The abundances of $^{44}$Ti and $^{60}$Co ejected by Type II supernovae are such that gamma-radiation from $^{44}$Ti decay SN 1987A could be detected by a future generation of gamma-ray telescopes and that the decay of $^{60}$Co might provide an interesting contribution to the late time light curve of SN 1987A and other Type II supernovae. To produce the solar $^{44}$Ca abundance and satisfy all the observational constraints, nature may prefer at least the occasional explosion of sub-Chandrasekhar mass white dwarfs as Type Ia supernovae. Depending on the escape fraction of positrons due to $^{56}$Co made in all kinds of Type Ia supernovae, a significant fraction of the steady state diffuse 511 keV emission may arise from the annihilation of positrons produced during the decay of $^{44}$Ti to $^{44}$Ca. The Ca and Ti isotopic anomalies in pre-solar grains confirm the production of $^{44}$Ti in supernovae and that
The ultimate fate of the universe, infinite expansion or a big crunch, can be determined by measuring the redshifts, apparent brightnesses, and intrinsic luminosities of very distant supernovae. Recent developments have provided tools that make such a program practicable: (1) Studies of relatively nearby Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) have shown that their intrinsic luminosities can be accurately determined; (2) New research techniques have made it possible to schedule the discovery and follow-up observations of distant supernovae, producing well over 50 very distant (z = 0.3 -- 0.7) SNe Ia to date. These distant supernovae provide a record of changes in the expansion rate over the past several billion years. By making precise measurements of supernovae at still greater distances, and thus extending this expansion history back far enough in time, we can distinguish the slowing caused by the gravitational attraction of the universe's mass density Omega_M from the effect of a possibly inflationary pressure caused by a cosmological constant Lambda. We report here the first such measurements, with our discovery of a Type Ia supernova (SN 1997ap) at z = 0.83. Measurements at the Keck II 10-m telescope make this the most distant spectroscopically confirmed supernova. Over two months of photometry of SN 1997ap with the Hubble Space Telescope and ground-based telescopes, when combined with previous measurements of nearer SNe Ia, suggests that we may live in a low mass-density universe. Further supernovae at comparable distances are currently scheduled for ground and space-based observations.
We review some of the reasons for believing that the generic core-collapse supernova is neutrino-driven, not MHD-jet driven. We include a discussion of the possible role of rotation in supernova blast energetics and morphology, and speculate on the origin of Cas A's and SN1987A's ejecta fields. Two "explosive" phenomena may be associated with most core collapses, the neutrino-driven supernova itself and an underenergetic jet-like ejection that follows. The latter may be a magnetic wind that easily penetrates the debris created by the much more energetic supernova. We predict that many core-collapse supernova remnants should have sub-dominant jet-like features. In Cas A, we associate this sub-dominant collimated wind with the "jet/counter-jet" structure observed. We suggest that the actual Cas A explosion itself is at nearly right angles to this jet, along a rotation axis that coincides with the bulk of the ejecta, the iron lobes, and the putative direction of motion of the point source. It may be that when rotation becomes sufficiently rapid that the strong-neutrino-driven-supernova/weak-jet duality switches to a strong-MHD-jet scenario that might be associated with hypernovae, and in some cases GRBs. Finally, we present a calculation using a new 2D multi-group, flux-limited radiation/hydrodynamics code we have recently developed for the simulation of core-collapse supernovae. We discuss the rotation-induced anisotropy in the neutrino radiation field, neutrino heating, and the neutrino flux vectors and speculate on rotation's possible role in the supernova mechanism and in the overall supernova phenomenon.
We study the effect of environment on the properties of type Ia supernovae by analyzing the integrated spectra of 57 local type Ia supernova host galaxies. We deduce from the spectra the metallicity, current star formation rate, and star formation history of the host and compare these to the supernova decline rates. Additionally, we compare the host properties to the Hubble residuals for each SN. Our results indicate a statistically insignificant correlation in the direction higher metallicity spiral galaxies host fainter type Ia supernovae. However, we present qualitative evidence suggesting progenitor age is more likely than metallicity to be the source of variability in supernova peak luminosities. We do not find a correlation between the supernova decline rate and both host galaxy absolute B magnitude and current/past host galaxy star formation rate. A tenuous correlation is observed between the supernova Hubble residuals and host galaxy metallicities. Finally, we characterize the environmental property distributions for type Ia supernova host galaxies through a comparison with two larger, more general galaxy distributions using Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests. The results show the host galaxy metallicity distribution to be similar to the metallicity distributions of the galaxies of the NFGS and SDSS. Significant differences are observed between the SN Ia distributions of absolute B magnitude and star formation histories and the corresponding distributions of galaxies in the NFGS and SDSS. Among these is an abrupt upper limit observed in the distribution of star formation histories of the host galaxy sample suggesting a type Ia supernovae characteristic delay time lower limit of approximately 2.0 Gyrs. Other distribution discrepancies are investigated and the effect on the supernova properties are discussed.
We present spectra for 14 high-redshift (0.17 < z < 0.83) supernovae, which were discovered by the Supernova Cosmology Project as part of a campaign to measure cosmological parameters. The spectra are used to determine the redshift and classify the supernova type, essential information if the supernovae are to be used for cosmological studies. Redshifts were derived either from the spectrum of the host galaxy or from the spectrum of the supernova itself. We present evidence that these supernovae are of Type Ia by matching to spectra of nearby supernovae. We find that the dates of the spectra relative to maximum light determined from this fitting process are consistent with the dates determined from the photometric light curves, and moreover the spectral time-sequence for SNe Type Ia at low and high redshift is indistinguishable. We also show that the expansion velocities measured from blueshifted CaHK are consistent with those measured for low-redshift Type Ia supernovae. From these first-level quantitative comparisons we find no evidence for evolution in SNIa properties between these low- and high-redshift samples. Thus even though our samples may not be complete, we conclude that there is a population of SNe Ia at high redshift whose spectral properties match those at low redshift.
Supernovae are essential to understanding the chemical evolution of the Universe. Type Ia supernovae also provide the most powerful observational tool currently available for studying the expansion history of the Universe and the nature of dark energy. Our basic knowledge of supernovae comes from the study of their photometric and spectroscopic properties. However, the presently available data sets of optical and near-infrared light curves of supernovae are rather small and/or heterogeneous, and employ photometric systems that are poorly characterized. Similarly, there are relatively few supernovae whose spectral evolution has been well sampled, both in wavelength and phase, with precise spectrophotometric observations. The low-redshift portion of the Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP) seeks to remedy this situation by providing photometry and spectrophotometry of a large sample of supernovae taken on telescope/filter/detector systems that are well understood and well characterized. During a five-year program which began in September 2004, we expect to obtain high-precision u'g'r'i'BVYJHKs light curves and optical spectrophotometry for about 250 supernovae of all types. In this paper we provide a detailed description of the CSP survey observing and data reduction methodology. In addition, we present preliminary photometry and spectra obtained for a few representative supernovae during the first observing campaign.
Wide-field, very long baseline interferometry (VLBI) observations of the nearby starburst galaxy NGC 253, obtained with the Australian Long Baseline Array (LBA), have produced a 2.3 GHz image with a maximum angular resolution of 15 mas (0.3 pc). Six sources were detected, all corresponding to sources identified in higher frequency (>5 GHz) VLA images. One of the sources, supernova remnant 5.48-43.3, is resolved into a shell-like structure approximately 90 mas (1.7 pc) in diameter. From these data and data from the literature, the spectra of 20 compact radio sources in NGC 253 were modelled and found to be consistent with free-free absorbed power laws. Broadly, the free-free opacity is highest toward the nucleus but varies significantly throughout the nuclear region (tau_0 ~ 1->20), implying that the overall structure of the ionised medium is clumpy. Of the 20 sources, nine have flat intrinsic spectra associated with thermal radio emission and the remaining 11 have steep intrinsic spectra, associated with synchrotron emission from supernova remnants. A supernova rate upper limit of 2.4 yr^-1 is determined for the inner 320 pc region of the galaxy at the 95% confidence level, based on the lack of detection of new sources in observations spanning almost 17 years and a simple model for the evolution of supernova remnants. A supernova rate of >0.14 (v/10^4) yr^-1 is implied from estimates of supernova remnant source counts, sizes and expansion rates, where v is the radial expansion velocity of the supernova remnant in km s^-1. A star formation rate of 3.4 (v/10^4) < SFR(M<=5Msun) < 59 Msun yr^-1 has been estimated directly from the supernova rate limits and is of the same order of magnitude as rates determined from integrated FIR and radio luminosities.
Two quantitative tests DIFF1 and DIFF2 for measuring goodness-of-fit between two locally-normalized supernova spectra are presented. Locally-normalized spectra are obtained by dividing a spectrum by the same spectrum smoothed over a wavelength interval relatively large compared to line features, but relatively small compared to continuum features. DIFF1 essentially measures the mean relative difference between the line patterns of locally-normalized spectra and DIFF2 is DIFF1 minimized by a relative logarithmic wavelength shift between the spectra: the shift is effectively an artificial relative Doppler shift. Both DIFF1 and DIFF2 measure the physical similarity of line formation, and thus of supernovae. DIFF1 puts more weight on overall physical similarity of the supernovae than DIFF2 because the DIFF2 shift compensates somewhat for some physical distinction in the supernovae. Both tests are useful in ordering supernovae into empirical groupings for further analysis. We present some examples of locally-normalized spectra for Type IIb supernova SN 1993J with some analysis of these spectra. The UV parts of two of the SN 1993J spectra are HST spectra that have not been published before. We also give an example of fitted locally-normalized spectra and, as an example of the utility of DIFF1 and DIFF2, some preliminary statistical results for hydrogen-deficient core-collapse (HDCC) supernova spectra. This paper makes use of and refers to material to found at the first author's online supernova spectrum database SUSPEND (SUpernovae Spectra PENDing further analysis: see http://www.nhn.ou.edu/~jeffery/astro/sne/spectra/spectra.html)
We use the HST ACS imaging of the two GOODS fields during Cycles 11, 12, and 13 to derive the Type Ia supernova rate in four redshift intervals in the range 0.2<z<1.8. Compared to our previous results based on Cycle 11 observations only, we have increased the coverage of the search by a factor 2.7, making the total area searched equivalent to one square degree. The sample now consists of 56 Type Ia supernovae. The rates we derive are consistent with our results based on the Cycle 11 observations. In particular, the few detected supernovae at z>1.4 supports our previous result that there is a drop in the Type Ia supernova rate at high redshift, suggesting a long time delay between the formation of the progenitor star and the explosion of the supernova. If described by a simple one-parameter model, we find a characteristic delay time of 2-3 Gyr. However, a number of recent results based on e.g., low redshift supernova samples and supernova host galaxy properties suggest that the supernova delay time distribution is bimodal. In this model, a major fraction of the Type Ia supernova rate is 'prompt' and follows the star formation rate, while a smaller fraction of the rate has a long delay time, making this channel proportional to mass. While our results are fully consistent with the bimodal model at low redshifts, the low rate we find at z>1.4 appears to contradict these results. Models that corrects for star formation hidden by dust may explain at least part of the differences. Here we discuss this possibility together with other ways to reconcile data and models.
We present a semi-supervised method for photometric supernova typing. Our approach is to first use the nonlinear dimension reduction technique diffusion map to detect structure in a database of supernova light curves and subsequently employ random forest classification on a spectroscopically confirmed training set to learn a model that can predict the type of each newly observed supernova. We demonstrate that this is an effective method for supernova typing. As supernova numbers increase, our semi-supervised method efficiently utilizes this information to improve classification, a property not enjoyed by template based methods. Applied to supernova data simulated by Kessler et al. (2010b) to mimic those of the Dark Energy Survey, our methods achieve (cross-validated) 95% Type Ia purity and 87% Type Ia efficiency on the spectroscopic sample, but only 50% Type Ia purity and 50% efficiency on the photometric sample due to their spectroscopic follow-up strategy. To improve the performance on the photometric sample, we search for better spectroscopic follow-up procedures by studying the sensitivity of our machine learned supernova classification on the specific strategy used to obtain training sets. With a fixed amount of spectroscopic follow-up time, we find that deeper magnitude-limited spectroscopic surveys are better for producing training sets. For supernova Ia (II-P) typing, we obtain a 44% (1%) increase in purity to 72% (87%) and 30% (162%) increase in efficiency to 65% (84%) of the sample using a 25th (24.5th) magnitude-limited survey instead of the shallower spectroscopic sample used in the original simulations. When redshift information is available, we incorporate it into our analysis using a novel method of altering the diffusion map representation of the supernovae. Incorporating host redshifts leads to a 5% improvement in Type Ia purity and 13% improvement in Type Ia efficiency.
Pair Instability Supernovae have been suggested as candidates for some Super Luminous Supernovae, such as SN 2007bi, and as one of the dominant types of explosion occurring in the early Universe from massive, zero-metallicity Population III stars. The progenitors of such events can be rapidly rotating, therefore exhibiting different evolutionary properties due to the effects of rotationally-induced mixing and mass-loss. Proper identification of such events requires rigorous radiation hydrodynamics and radiative transfer calculations that capture not only the behavior of the light curve but also the spectral evolution of these events. We present radiation hydrodynamics and radiation transport calculations for 90-300 Msun rotating pair-instability supernovae covering both the shock break-out and late light curve phases. We also investigate cases of different initial metallicity and rotation rate to determine the impact of these parameters on the detailed spectral characteristics of these events. In agreement with recent results on non-rotating pair instability supernovae, we find that for a range of progenitor masses and rotation rates these events have intrinsically red colors in contradiction with observations of super-luminous supernovae. The spectroscopic properties of rotating pair instability supernovae are similar to those of non-rotating events with stripped hydrogen and helium envelopes. We find that the progenitor metallicity and rotation rate properties are erased after the explosion and cannot be identified in the resulting model spectra. It is the combined effects of pre-supernova mass-loss and the basic properties of the supernova ejecta such as mass, temperature and velocity that have the most direct impact in the model spectra of pair instability supernovae.
We estimate systematic errors due to K-corrections in standard photometric analyses of high redshift Type Ia supernovae. Errors due to K-correction occur when the spectral template model underlying the lightcurve fitter poorly represents the actual supernova spectral energy distribution, meaning that the distance modulus cannot be recovered accurately. In order to quantify this effect, synthetic photometry is performed on artificially redshifted spectrophotometric data from 119 low-redshift supernovae from the Nearby Supernova Factory, and the resulting lightcurves are fit with a conventional lightcurve fitter. We measure the variation in the standardized magnitude that would be fit for a given supernova if located at a range of redshifts and observed with various filter sets corresponding to current and future supernova surveys. We find significant variation in the measurements of the same supernovae placed at different redshifts regardless of filters used, which causes dispersion greater than $\sim0.05$ mag for measurements of photometry using the Sloan-like filters and a bias that corresponds to a $0.03$ shift in $w$ when applied to an outside data set. To test the result of a shift in supernova population or environment at higher redshifts, we repeat our calculations with the addition of a reweighting of the supernovae as a function of redshift and find that this strongly affects the results and would have repercussions for cosmology. We discuss possible methods to reduce the contribution of the K-correction bias and uncertainty.
We study the dust evolution in the supernova remnant Cassiopeia A. We follow the processing of dust grains that formed in the Type II-b supernova by modelling the sputtering of grains. The dust is located in dense ejecta clumps crossed by the reverse shock. Further sputtering in the inter-clump medium once the clumps are disrupted by the reverse shock is investigated. The dust evolution in the dense ejecta clumps of Type II-P supernovae and their remnants is also studied. We study oxygen-rich clumps that describe the ejecta oxygen core, and carbon-rich clumps that correspond to the outermost carbon-rich ejecta zone. We consider the dust components formed in the supernova, several reverse shock velocities and inter-clump gas temperatures, and derive dust grain size distributions and masses as a function of time. We find that non-thermal sputtering in clumps is important and accounts for reducing the grain population by ~ 40% to 80% in mass, depending on the clump gas over-density and the grain type and size. A Type II-b supernova forms small grains that are sputtered within clumps and in the inter-clump medium. For Cas A, silicate grains do not survive thermal sputtering in the inter-clump medium. Our derived masses of currently processed silicate, alumina and carbon grains in Cas A agree well with values derived from observations. Grains produced by Type II-P supernovae better survive the remnant phase. For dense ejecta clumps, dust survival efficiencies range between 42% and 98% in mass. For the SN1987A model, the derived surviving dust mass is in the range ~ 0.06-0.13 Msolar. This type of dense supernovae may efficiently provide galaxies with dust. Specifically, silicate grains over 0.1 micron and other grains over 0,05 micron survive thermal sputtering in the remnant. Therefore, pre-solar grains of supernova origin possibly form in the dense ejecta clumps of Type II-P supernovae.
There is now substantial evidence that the progenitors of some core-collapse supernovae undergo enhanced or extreme mass loss prior to explosion. The imprint of this mass loss is observed in the spectra and dynamics of the expanding blastwave on timescales of days to years after core-collapse, and the effects on the spectral and dynamical evolution may linger long after the supernova has evolved into the remnant stage. In this paper, we present for the first time, largely self-consistent end-to-end simulations for the evolution of a massive star from the pre-main sequence, up to and through core collapse, and into the remnant phase. We present three models and compare and contrast how the progenitor mass loss history impacts the dynamics and spectral evolution of the supernovae and supernova remnants. We study a model which only includes steady mass loss, a model with enhanced mass loss over a period of $\sim$ 5000 years prior to core-collapse, and a model with extreme mass loss over a period of $\sim$ 500 years prior to core collapse. The models are not meant to address any particular supernova or supernova remnant, but rather to highlight the important role that the progenitor evolution plays in the observable qualities of supernovae and supernova remnants. Through comparisons of these three different progenitor evolution scenarios, we find that the mass loss in late stages (during and after core carbon burning) can have a profound impact on the dynamics and spectral evolution of the supernova remnant centuries after core-collapse.
If the Sun was born in a relatively compact open cluster, it is quite likely that a massive (10MSun) star was nearby when it exploded in a supernova. The repercussions of a supernova can be rather profound, and the current Solar System may still bear the memory of this traumatic event. The truncation of the Kuiper belt and the tilt of the ecliptic plane with respect to the Sun's rotation axis could be such signatures. We simulated the effect of a nearby supernova on the young Solar System using the Astronomical Multipurpose Software Environment. Our calculations are realized in two subsequent steps in which we study the effect of the supernova irradiation on the circumstellar disk and the effect of the impact of the nuclear blast-wave which arrives a few decades later. We find that the blastwave of our adopted supernova exploding at a distance of $0.15$--$0.40$\,pc and at an angle of $35^\circ$--$65^\circ$ with respect to the angular-momentum axis of the circumsolar disk would induce a misalignment between the Sun's equator and its disk to $5^\circ.6\pm1^\circ.2$, consistent with the current value. The blast of a supernova truncates the disk at a radius between $42$ and $55$\,au, which is consistent with the current edge of the Kuiper belt. For the most favored parameters, the irradiation by the supernova as well as the blast wave heat the majority of the disk to $\sim 1200$\,K, which is sufficiently hot to melt chondrules in the circumstellar disk. The majority of planetary system may have been affected by a nearby supernova, some of its repercussions, such as truncation and tilting of the disk, may still be visible in their current planetary system's topology. The amount of material from the supernova blast wave that is accreted by the circumstellar disk is too small by several orders of magnitude to explain the current abundance of the short live radionuclide $^{26}$Al.
In this catalog we compile information for all supernovae discovered by the All-Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN) as well as all other bright ($m_{peak}\leq17$), spectroscopically confirmed supernovae found in 2017, totaling 308 supernovae. We also present UV through near-IR magnitudes gathered from public databases of all host galaxies for the supernovae in the sample. We perform statistical analyses of our full bright supernova sample, which now contains 949 supernovae discovered since 2014 May 1, including supernovae from our previous catalogs. This is the fourth of a series of yearly papers on bright supernovae and their hosts from the ASAS-SN team, and this work presents updated data and measurements, including light curves, redshifts, classifications, and host galaxy identifications, that supersede information contained in any previous publications.
Core-collapse supernovae are found in galaxies with ongoing star-formation. In a starburst galaxy hosting an active galactic nucleus with a relativistic jet, supernovae can take place inside the jet. The collision of the supernova ejecta with the jet flow is expected to lead to the formation of an interaction region, in which particles can be accelerated and produce high-energy emission. We study the non-thermal radiation produced by electrons accelerated as a result of a supernova explosion inside the jet of an active galactic nucleus within a star-forming galaxy. We first analyzed the dynamical evolution of the supernova ejecta impacted by the jet. Then, we explored the parameter space using simple prescriptions for the observed gamma-ray lightcurve. Finally, the synchrotron and the inverse Compton spectral energy distributions for two types of sources, a radio galaxy and a powerful blazar, are computed. For a radio galaxy, the interaction between a supernova and a jet of power $\sim 10^{43}-10^{44}$~erg~s$^{-1}$ can produce apparent gamma-ray luminosities of $\sim 10^{42}-10^{43}$~erg~s$^{-1}$, with an event duty cycle of supernova remnant (SNR) interacting with the jet close to one for one galaxy. For a blazar with a powerful jet of $\sim 10^{46}$~erg~s$^{-1}$, the jet-supernova ejecta interaction could produce apparent gamma-ray luminosities of $\sim 10^{43}-10^{44}$~erg~s$^{-1}$, but with a much lower duty cycle. The interaction of supernovae with misaligned jets of moderate power can be relatively frequent, and can result in steady gamma-ray emission potentially detectable for sources in the local universe. For powerful blazars much farther away, the emission would be steady as well, and it might be detectable under very efficient acceleration, but the events would be rather infrequent.
Hydrogen-rich, core-collapse supernovae are typically divided into four classes: IIP, IIL, IIn, and IIb. In general, interaction with circumstellar material is only considered for Type IIn supernovae. However, recent hydrodynamic modeling of IIP and IIL supernovae requires circumstellar material to reproduce their early light curves. In this scenario, IIL supernovae experience large amounts of mass loss before exploding. We test this hypothesis on ASASSN-15oz, a Type IIL supernova. With extensive follow-up in the X- ray, UV, optical, IR, and radio we present our search for signs of interaction, and the mass-loss history indicated by their detection. We find evidence of short-lived intense mass-loss just prior to explosion from light curve modeling, amounting in 1.5 M$_{\odot}$ of material within 1800 R$_{\odot}$ of the progenitor. We also detect the supernova in the radio, indicating mass-loss rates of $10^{-6}-10^{-7}$ M$_{\odot}$ yr$^{-1}$ prior to the extreme mass-loss period. Our failure to detect the supernova in the X-ray and the lack of narrow emission lines in the UV, optical, and NIR do not contradict this picture and place an upper limit on the mass-loss rate outside the extreme period of $<10^{-4}$ M$_{\odot}$ yr$^{-1}$. This paper highlights the importance gathering comprehensive data on more Type II supernovae to enable detailed modeling of the progenitor and supernova which can elucidate their mass-loss histories and envelope structures and thus inform stellar evolution models.
We use the Expanding Photosphere Method to determine distances to 10 type II supernovae. The effects of asymmetries, extinction, and flux dilution are explored. Using empirical evidence and time-independent, spherical models which treat H and He in non-LTE, we show that blackbody corrections caused by flux dilution are small for type II supernovae in the infrared, and in the optical when their color temperatures are less than 6000~K. The extinction to a type II-P supernova can be estimated from its light curve: the uncertainty introduced into a distance measurement due to extinction is usually less than 10\%. Correcting for extinction and flux dilution we derive distances to 10 supernovae: SN 1968L, SN 1969L, SN 1970G, SN 1973R, SN 1979C, SN 1980K, SN 1987A, SN 1988A, SN 1990E, and SN 1990ae. The distance measurements span a wide range, 50 kpc to 120 Mpc, which is unique among the methods for establishing the extragalactic distance scale. The distances measured to SN 1970G in M101 and SN 1987A in the LMC are in good agreement with distances determined from Cepheid variable stars. Our distance to the Virgo Cluster, 22 +- 3 Mpc, is larger than recent distances estimates made using surface brightness fluctuations, planetary nebula luminosity functions, and the Tully-Fisher method. Using the distances determined from these type II supernovae we derive a value of $H_0 = 60 \pm 10$ km sec$^{-1}$Mpc$^{-1}$. This value is subject to errors caused by local deviations in the Hubble flow, but will soon be improved by applying the Expanding Photosphere Method to several distant type II supernovae.
It is greatly expected that the relic neutrino background from past supernovae is detected by Superkamiokande (SK) which is now under construction. We calculate the spectrum and the event rate at SK systematically by using the results of simulations of a supernova explosion and reasonable supernova rates. We also investigate the effect of a cosmological constant, $\Lambda$, on the spectrum, since some recent cosmological observations strongly suggest the existence of $\Lambda$. We find following results. 1) The spectrum has a peak at about 3 MeV, which is much lower than that of previous estimate ($6 \sim$ 10 MeV). 2) The event rate at SK in the range from 10 MeV to 50 MeV, where the relic neutrinos from past supernovae is dominant, is about $25 \, {h_{50}}^2 \, \left( \frac{R_{SN}}{0.1 {\rm yr^{-1}}} \right) \left(\frac{n_G \, h_{50}^{-3}}{0.02{\rm Mpc}^{-3}}\right)$ events per year, where $R_{SN}$ is the supernova rate in a galaxy, $n_G$ is the number density of galaxies, and $h_{50} = H_0 /$ (50km/s/Mpc), where $H_0$ is the Hubble constant. 3) The event rate is almost insensitive to $\Lambda$. The flux increases in the low energy side ($< 10$ MeV) with increasing $\Lambda$, but decreases in the high energy side (10 MeV $<$) in models in which the integrated number of supernovae in one galaxy is fixed.
We have begun a program to discover high-redshift supernovae ($z \approx$ 0.25--0.5), and study them with follow-up photometry and spectroscopy. We report here our first discovery, a supernova at $z = 0.458$. The photometry for this supernova closely matches the lightcurve calculated for this redshift from the template of well-observed nearby Type Ia supernovae. We discuss the measurement of the deceleration parameter $q_0$ using such high-redshift supernovae, and give the best fit value assuming this one supernova is a normal, unextincted Type Ia. We describe the main sources of error in such a measurement of $q_0$, and ways to reduce these errors.
The recent discovery of a supernova (SN 1998bw) seemingly associated with GRB~980425 adds a new twist to the decades-old debate over the origin of gamma-ray bursts. To investigate the possibility that some (or all) bursts are associated with supernovae, we performed a systematic search for temporal/angular correlations using catalogs of BATSE and BATSE/{\it Ulysses} burst locations. We find no associations with any of the precise BATSE/{\it Ulysses} locations, which allows us to conclude that the fraction of high-fluence gamma-ray bursts from known supernovae is small ($<$0.2%). For the more numerous weaker bursts, the corresponding limiting fraction of 1.5% is less constraining due to the imprecise locations of these events. This limit ($1.5% \simeq 18$ bursts) allows that a large fraction of the recent supernovae used as a comparison data set (18 supernovae $\simeq 20%$) could have associated gamma-ray bursts. Thus, although we find no significant evidence to support a burst/supernova association, the possibility cannot be excluded for weak bursts.
Using 3D hydrodynamical simulations of galaxy formation with supernova feedback and a multiphase medium, we derive theoretical relations analogous to the observed Tully-Fisher (TF) relations in various photometric bands. This paper examines the influence of self-regulation mechanisms including supernova feedback on galaxy luminosities and the TF relation in three cosmological scenarios (CDM, \Lambda CDM and BSI (broken scale invariance)). The galaxy catalogs derived from our hydrodynamical simulations lead to an acceptably small scatter in the theoretical TF relation amounting to \Delta M =0.2-0.4 in the I band, and increasing by 0.1 magnitude from the I-band to the B-band. Our results give strong evidence that the tightness of the TF relation cannot be attributed to supernova feedback alone. However, although eliminating supernova feedback hardly affects the scatter, it does influence the slope of the TF relation quite sensitively. With supernova feedback, L \propto V_c^{3-3.5} (depending on the strength of supernova feedback). Without it, L \propto V_c^{2} as predicted by the virial theorem with constant M/L.   The luminosity functions in the B and K bands are quite sensitive to supernova feedback at the faint end studied here. We find that the faint end of the B-band luminosity function (-18 \leq M_B \leq -15) has a slope that is steeper than the Stromlo-APM estimate, but in rough agreement with the recent ESO Slice Project estimates.
We present a rigorous method, based on Bayesian inference, for calculating the odds favoring the hypothesis that any particular class of astronomical transients produce gamma-ray bursts over the hypothesis that they do not. We then apply this method to a sample of 83 Type Ia supernovae and a sample of 20 Type Ib-Ic supernovae. We find overwhelming odds against the hypothesis that all Type Ia supernovae produce gamma-ray bursts, whether at low redshift ($10^{9}:1$) or high-redshift ($10^{12}:1$), and very large odds ($6000:1$) against the hypothesis that all Type Ib, Ib/c, and Ic supernovae produce observable gamma-ray bursts. We find large odds ($34:1$) against the hypothesis that a fraction of Type Ia supernovae produce observable gamma-ray bursts, and moderate odds ($6:1$) against the hypothesis that a fraction of Type Ib-Ic supernovae produce observable bursts. We have also re-analyzed both a corrected version of the Wang & Wheeler sample of Type Ib-Ic SNe and our larger sample of 20 Type Ib-Ic SNe, using a generalization of their frequentist method. We find no significant evidence in either case of a correlation between Type Ib-Ic SNe and GRBs, consistent with the very strong evidence against such a correlation that we find from our Bayesian analysis.
We numerically studied the explosion of a supernova caused by supersonic jets present in its center. The jets are assumed to be generated by a magneto-rotational mechanism when a stellar core collapses into a neutron star. We simulated the process of the jet propagation through the star, jet breakthrough, and the ejection of the supernova envelope by the lateral shocks generated during jet propagation. The end result of the interaction is a highly nonspherical supernova explosion with two high-velocity jets of material moving in polar directions, and a slower moving, oblate, highly distorted ejecta containing most of the supernova material. The jet-induced explosion is entirely due to the action of the jets on the surrounding star and does not depend on neutrino transport or re-acceleration of a stalled shock. The jet mechanism can explain the observed high polarization of Type Ib,c and Type II supernovae, pulsar kicks, very high velocity material observed in supernova remnants, indications that radioactive material was carried to the hydrogen-rich layers in SN1987A, and some others observations that are very difficult or impossible to explain by the neutrino energy deposition mechanism. The breakout of the jet from a compact, hydrogen- deficient core may account for the gamma-ray bursts and radio outburst associated with SN1998bw/GRB980425.
Due to their high luminosity at maximum and degree of homogeneity, Type Ia supernovae have been extensively used for cosmological purpouses, in particular to estimate extragalactic distances and the Hubble constant. Recently the number of Type Ia supernovae detected at high redshift has increased, opening the possibility of determining the mass density parameter, the cosmological constant and the deceleration parameter. The observed supernovae appear to be further than expected -even for an empty Universe-, implying a low density Universe and moreover an accelerating Universe. Among the various uncertainties, we address the possibility that old supernovae are not equal to current supernovae. From first principles, an evolution of progenitors with time is expected. Additionally, some observations show a dependence of the observed properties on galaxy type and colour. Our aim in this work is to study the outcome of exploding CO white dwarfs following the evolution of the progenitor intermediate mass stars with different masses and metallicities. Once this influence of the progentitor has been determined, the observations may be corrected. At the present stage of this project we are not able to quantify this effect properly. One result is clear, that the differences at maximum are expected to be small ($\sim$0.2 mag) but this is of the same order as all the evidence for a positive cosmological constant ($\sim$0.25 mag).
There are hints that nearby Type Ia supernovae may be a little different than those at large redshift. Confidence in the conclusion that there is a cosmological constant and an accelerating Universe thus still requires the hard work of sorting out potential systematic effects. Polarization data show that core-collapse supernovae (Type II and Ib/c) probably depart strongly from spherical symmetry. Evidence for exceedingly energetic supernovae must be considered self-consistently with evidence that they are asymmetric, a condition that affects energy estimates. Jets arising near the compact object can produce such asymmetries. There is growing conviction that gamma-ray bursts intrinsically involve collimated or jet-like flow and hence that they are also strongly asymmetric. SN 1998bw is a potential rosetta stone that will help to sort out the physics of explosive events. Are events like SN 1998bw more closely related to "ordinary" supernovae or "hypernovae?" Do they leave behind neutron stars as "ordinary" pulsars or "magnetars" or is the remnant a black hole? Are any of these events associated with classic cosmic gamma-ray bursts as suggested by the supernova-like modulation of the afterglows of GRB 970228, GRB 980326 and GRB 990712?
The discovery of the nearest young supernova remnant RXJ0852-4622/GROJ0852-4642 in the Galaxy by ROSAT and COMPTEL has been reported recently. Age and distance are determined to ~680 years and ~200 pc by the X-ray diameter and the gamma-ray line flux of radioactive 44Ti. Here we discuss the implications of the X-ray spectra and of the fact that 1.8 MeV gamma-ray line emission from the decay of 26Al has been measured from the Vela region with a certain fraction possibly associated with the new SNR. We estimate an uncertainty of the age of +-100 yrs for a fixed yield of 44Ti. The highest values of 44Ti yield provided by current supernova models give worst case upper limits of 1100 yrs for the age and of 500 pc for the distance. Also the unknown ionization stage of 44Ti adds to the uncertainty of age and distance which is atmost another 35% on top. Both the energy balance compiled for the remnant and yield predictions for 44Ti and 26Al by supernova models favour a core-collapse event. Two point sources have been found in the vicinity of the explosion center, either one of these might be the neutron star left by the supernova. If there is a neutron star the X-ray count- rates of the two point sources provide an upper limit of the blackbody surface temperature, which is very unlikely to exceed 3x10E5 K. The supernova might have been observed some 750+-150 yrs ago, but based on the data of SN1181, there is a realistic chance that it has been missed if the supernova was sub-luminous.
We present a self-consistent comparison of the rise times for low- and high-redshift Type Ia supernovae. Following previous studies, the early light curve is modeled using a t-squared law, which is then mated with a modified Leibundgut template light curve. The best-fit t-squared law is determined for ensemble samples of low- and high-redshift supernovae by fitting simultaneously for all light curve parameters for all supernovae in each sample. Our method fully accounts for the non-negligible covariance amongst the light curve fitting parameters, which previous analyses have neglected. Contrary to Riess et al. (1999), we find fair to good agreement between the rise times of the low- and high-redshift Type Ia supernovae. The uncertainty in the rise time of the high-redshift Type Ia supernovae is presently quite large (roughly +/- 1.2 days statistical), making any search for evidence of evolution based on a comparison of rise times premature. Furthermore, systematic effects on rise time determinations from the high-redshift observations, due to the form of the late-time light curve and the manner in which the light curves of these supernovae were sampled, can bias the high-redshift rise time determinations by up to +3.6/-1.9 days under extreme situations. The peak brightnesses - used for cosmology - do not suffer any significant bias, nor any significant increase in uncertainty.
Close binaries consisting of a main sequence star and a white dwarf are considered as candidates for Type~Ia supernova progenitors. We present selfconsistent calculations of the time dependence of the structure of the main sequence star, the mass transfer rate, and the orbit by means of a binary stellar evolution program. In contrast to results based on simple estimates of the mass transfer rate in systems of the considered type, our results allow for the possibility that even systems with rather small initial white dwarf masses (~ 0.7 M_sun) may produce Type Ia supernovae. We present results for two different metallicities, Z=0.02 and Z=0.001. We find that for systems with the lower metallicity, the mass transfer rates are on average five times larger than in comparable system at solar metallicity. This leads to a systematic shift of the supernova Ia progenitor population. Firstly, while for Z=0.02 donor star initial masses in supernova progenitor systems are restricted to the range 1.6...2.3 M_sun, they are in the interval 1.4...1.8 M_sun at low Z. Secondly, the initial white dwarf masses need, on average, to be larger by 0.2 M_sun at low Z in order to obtain a Chandrasekhar mass white dwarf. This metallicity dependences may be responsible for a drop of the Type Ia supernova rate for low metallicity, and may introduce a Z-dependence in the properties of supernovae. We also estimate the X-ray luminosities of the computed systems, and investigate their donor star and orbital properties.
The use of Type Ia supernovae as calibrated standard candles is one of the most powerful tools to study the expansion history of the universe and thereby its energy components. While the analysis of some ~50 supernovae at redshifts around z~0.5 have provided strong evidence for an energy component with negative pressure, ``dark energy'', more data is needed to enable an accurate estimate of the amount and nature of this energy. This might be accomplished by a dedicated space telescope, the SuperNova / Acceleration Probe (2000; SNAP), which aims at collecting a large number of supernovae with z<2.   In this paper we assess the ability of the SNAP mission to determine various properties of the ``dark energy.'' To exemplify, we expect SNAP, if operated for three years to study Type Ia supernovae, to be able to determine the parameters in a linear equation of state w(z)=w0 + w1 z to within a statistical uncertainty of +-0.04 for w0 and +0.15,-0.17 for w1 assuming that the universe is known to be flat and an independent high precision (sigma_{Omega_m}=0.015) measurement of the mass density Omega_m, is used to constrain the fit. An additional improvement can be obtained if a large number of low-z, as well as high-z, supernovae are included in the sample.
We compute the chemical and thermal history of the intra-cluster medium in rich and poor clusters under the assumption that supernovae (I, II) are the major responsible both for the chemical enrichment and the heating of the intra-cluster gas. We assume that only ellipticals and S0 galaxies contribute to the enrichment and heating of the intra-cluster gas through supernova driven winds and explore several prescriptions for describing the feed-back between supernovae and the interstellar medium in galaxies. We integrate then the chemical and energetical contributions from single cluster galaxies over the cluster luminosity function and derive the variations of these quantities as functions of the cosmic time. We reach the following conclusions: i) while type II supernovae dominates the chemical enrichment and energetics inside the galaxies, type Ia supernovae play a predominant role in the intra-cluster medium, ii) galaxy models, which reproduce the observed chemical abundances and abundance ratios in the intra-cluster medium, predict a maximum of 0.3-0.4 keV per particle of energy input, a result obtained by assuming that type Ia supernovae contribute 100% of their initial blast wave energy whereas type II supernovae contribute only by a few percents of their initial energy.
The star formation history of the globular cluster Omega Centauri is investigated in the context of an inhomogeneous chemical evolution model in which supernovae induce star formation. The proposed model explains recent observations for Omega Cen stars, and divides star formation into three epochs. At the end of the first epoch, ~ 70% of the gas was expelled by supernovae. AGB stars then supplied s-process elements to the remaining gas during the first interval of ~300 Myr. This explains the observed sudden increase in Ba/Fe ratios in Omega Cen stars at [Fe/H] ~ -1.6. Supernovae at the end of the second epoch were unable to expel the gas. Eventually, Type Ia supernovae initiated supernova-induced star formation, and remaining gas was stripped when the cluster passed through the newly formed disk of the Milky Way. The formation of Omega Cen is also discussed in the framework of globular cluster formation triggered by cloud-cloud collisions. In this scenario, the relative velocity of clouds in the collision determines the later chemical evolution in the clusters. A head-on collision of proto-cluster clouds with a low relative velocity would have converted less than 1% of gas into stars and promoted the subsequent chemical evolution by supernova-driven star formation. This is consistent with present observed form of Omega Cen. In contrast, the other Galactic globular clusters are expected to have formed from more intense head-on collisions, and the resultant clouds would have been too thin for supernovae to accumulate enough gas to form the next generation of stars. This explains the absence of chemical evolution in these other globular clusters.
Over the past decade, supernovae have emerged as some of the most powerful tools for measuring extragalactic distances. A well developed physical understanding of type II supernovae allow them to be used to measure distances independent of the extragalactic distance scale. Type Ia supernovae are empirical tools whose precision and intrinsic brightness make them sensitive probes of the cosmological expansion. Both types of supernovae are consistent with a Hubble Constant within ~10% of H_0 = 70 km/s/Mpc. Two teams have used type Ia supernovae to trace the expansion of the Universe to a look-back time more than 60% of the age of the Universe. These observations show an accelerating Universe which is currently best explained by a cosmological constant or other form of dark energy with an equation of state near w = p/rho = -1. While there are many possible remaining systematic effects, none appears large enough to challenge these current results. Future experiments are planned to better characterize the equation of state of the dark energy leading to the observed acceleration by observing hundreds or even thousands of objects. These experiments will need to carefully control systematic errors to ensure future conclusions are not dominated by effects unrelated to cosmology.
Numerical simulations of the multi-phase interstellar medium have been carried out, using a 3D, nonlinear, magnetohydrodynamic, shearing-box model, with random motions driven by supernova explosions. These calculations incorporate the effects of magnetic fields and rotation in 3D; these play important dynamical roles in the galaxy, but are neglected in many other simulations. The supernovae driving the motions are not arbitrarily imposed, but occur where gas accumulates into cold, dense clouds; their implementation uses a physically motivated model for the evolution of such clouds. The process is self-regulating, and produces mean supernova rates as part of the solution. Simulations with differing mean density show a power law relation between the supernova rate and density, with exponent 1.7; this value is within the range suggested from observations (taking star formation rate as a proxy for supernova rate). The global structure of the supernova driven medium is strongly affected by the presence of magnetic fields; e.g. for one solution the filling factor of hot gas is found to vary from 0.19 (with no field) to 0.12 (with initial mid-plane field B_0=6 muG).
We describe the latest developments of the Geneva stellar evolution code in order to model the pre-supernova evolution of rotating massive stars. Rotating and non-rotating stellar models at solar metallicity with masses equal to 12, 15, 20, 25, 40 and 60 solar masses were computed from the ZAMS until the end of the core silicon burning phase. We took into account meridional circulation, secular shear instabilities, horizontal turbulence and dynamical shear instabilities.   Most of the differences between the pre-supernova structures obtained from rotating and non-rotating stellar models have their origin in the effects of rotation during the core hydrogen and helium burning phases.   The effects of rotation on pre-supernova models are significant between 15 and 30 solar masses. Indeed, rotation increases the core sizes (and the yields) by a factor ~ 1.5. Above 20 solar masses, rotation may change the colour of the supernova progenitors (blue instead of red supergiant) and the supernova type (Ib instead of II). Rotation affects the lower mass limits for radiative core carbon burning, for iron core collapse and for black hole formation. For Wolf-Rayet stars (M > 30 solar masses), the pre-supernova structures are mostly affected by the intensities of the stellar winds and less by rotational mixing. Finally, the core of our rotating WR stars contain enough angular momentum to produce GRBs.
The supernova remnant S147 harbors the pulsar PSR J0538+2817 whose characteristic age is more than an order of magnitude greater than the kinematic age of the system (inferred from the angular offset of the pulsar from the geometric center of the supernova remnant and the pulsar proper motion). To reconcile this discrepancy we propose that PSR J0538+2817 could be the stellar remnant of the first supernova explosion in a massive binary system and therefore could be as old as its characteristic age. Our proposal implies that S147 is the diffuse remnant of the second supernova explosion (that disrupted the binary system) and that a much younger second neutron star (not necessarily manifesting itself as a radio pulsar) should be associated with S147. We use the existing observational data on the system to suggest that the progenitor of the supernova that formed S147 was a Wolf-Rayet star (so that the supernova explosion occurred within a wind bubble surrounded by a massive shell) and to constrain the parameters of the binary system. We also restrict the magnitude and direction of the kick velocity received by the young neutron star at birth and find that the kick vector should not strongly deviate from the orbital plane of the binary system.
The absolute visual magnitudes of three Type IIb, 11 Type Ib and 13 Type Ic supernovae (collectively known as stripped-envelope supernovae) are studied by collecting data on the apparent magnitude, distance, and interstellar extinction of each event. Weighted and unweighted mean absolute magnitudes of the combined sample as well as various subsets of the sample are reported. The limited sample size and the considerable uncertainties, especially those associated with extinction in the host galaxies, prevent firm conclusions regarding differences between the absolute magnitudes of supernovae of Type Ib and Ic, and regarding the existence of separate groups of overluminous and normal-luminosity stripped-envelope supernovae. The spectroscopic characteristics of the events of the sample are considered. Three of the four overluminous events are known to have had unusual spectra. Most but not all of the normal luminosity events had typical spectra. Light curves of stripped-envelope supernovae are collected and compared. Because SN 1994I in M51 was very well observed it often is regarded as the prototypical Type Ic supernova, but it has the fastest light curve in the sample. Light curves are modeled by means of a simple analytical technique that, combined with a constraint on E/M from spectroscopy, yields internally consistent values of ejected mass, kinetic energy, and nickel mass.
Core-collapse supernovae emit of order $10^{58}$ neutrinos and antineutrinos of all flavors over several seconds, with average energies of 10--25 MeV. In the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO), which begins operations this year, neutrinos and antineutrinos of all flavors can be detected by reactions which break up the deuteron. For a future Galactic supernova at a distance of 10 kpc, several hundred events will be observed in SNO. The $\nu_\mu$ and $\nu_\tau$ neutrinos and antineutrinos are of particular interest, as a test of the supernova mechanism. In addition, it is possible to measure or limit their masses by their delay (determined from neutral-current events) relative to the $\bar{\nu}_e$ neutrinos (determined from charged-current events). Numerical results are presented for such a future supernova as seen in SNO. Under reasonable assumptions, and in the presence of the expected counting statistics, a $\nu_\mu$ or $\nu_\tau$ mass down to about 30 eV can be simply and robustly determined. If zero delay is measured, then the mass limit is independent of the distance $D$. At present, this seems to be the best possibility for direct determination of a $\nu_\mu$ or $\nu_\tau$ mass within the cosmologically interesting range. We also show how to separately study the supernova and neutrino physics, and how changes in the assumed supernova parameters would affect the mass sensitivity.
The MiniBooNE detector at Fermilab is designed to search for $\nu_\mu \to \nu_e$ oscillation appearance at $E_\nu \sim 1 {\rm GeV}$ and to make a decisive test of the LSND signal. The main detector (inside a veto shield) is a spherical volume containing 0.680 ktons of mineral oil. This inner volume, viewed by 1280 phototubes, is primarily a \v{C}erenkov medium, as the scintillation yield is low. The entire detector is under a 3 m earth overburden. Though the detector is not optimized for low-energy (tens of MeV) events, and the cosmic-ray muon rate is high (10 kHz), we show that MiniBooNE can function as a useful supernova neutrino detector. Simple trigger-level cuts can greatly reduce the backgrounds due to cosmic-ray muons. For a canonical Galactic supernova at 10 kpc, about 190 supernova $\bar{\nu}_e + p \to e^+ + n$ events would be detected. By adding MiniBooNE to the international network of supernova detectors, the possibility of a supernova being missed would be reduced. Additionally, the paths of the supernova neutrinos through Earth will be different for MiniBooNE and other detectors, thus allowing tests of matter-affected mixing effects on the neutrino signal.
We investigate resonant spin-flavor (RSF) conversions of supernova neutrinos which are induced by the interaction of neutrino magnetic moment and supernova magnetic fields. From the formulation which includes all three-flavor neutrinos and anti-neutrinos, we give a new crossing diagram that includes not only ordinary MSW resonance but also magnetically-induced RSF effect. With the diagram, it is found that four conversions occur in supernova, two are induced by the RSF effect and two by the pure MSW. We also numerically calculate neutrino conversions in supernova matter, using neutrino mixing parameters inferred from recent experimental results and a realistic supernova progenitor model. The results indicate that until 0.5 seconds after core bounce, the   RSF-induced $\bar{\nu}_e \leftrightarrow \nu_\tau$ transition occurs efficiently (adiabatic resonance), when $\mu_\nu \agt 10^{-12} \mu_B   (B_0 / 5 \times 10^{9} \mathrm G)^{-1}$, where $B_0$ is the strength of the magnetic field at the surface of iron core. We also evaluate the energy spectrum as a function of $\mu_\nu B_0$ at the SuperKamiokande detector and the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory using the calculated conversion probabilities, and find that the spectral deformation might have possibility to provide useful information on neutrino magnetic moment as well as magnetic field strength in supernovae.
The early Solar System contained short-lived radionuclides such as 60Fe (t1/2 = 1.5 Myr) whose most likely source was a nearby supernova. Previous models of Solar System formation considered a supernova shock that triggered the collapse of the Sun's nascent molecular cloud. We advocate an alternative hypothesis, that the Solar System's protoplanetary disk had already formed when a very close (< 1 pc) supernova injected radioactive material directly into the disk. We conduct the first numerical simulations designed to answer two questions related to this hypothesis: will the disk be destroyed by such a close supernova; and will any of the ejecta be mixed into the disk? Our simulations demonstrate that the disk does not absorb enough momentum from the shock to escape the protostar to which it is bound. Only low amounts (< 1%) of mass loss occur, due to stripping by Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities across the top of the disk, which also mix into the disk about 1% of the intercepted ejecta. These low efficiencies of destruction and injectation are due to the fact that the high disk pressures prevent the ejecta from penetrating far into the disk before stalling. Injection of gas-phase ejecta is too inefficient to be consistent with the abundances of radionuclides inferred from meteorites. On the other hand, the radionuclides found in meteorites would have condensed into dust grains in the supernova ejecta, and we argue that such grains will be injected directly into the disk with nearly 100% efficiency. The meteoritic abundances of the short-lived radionuclides such as 60Fe therefore are consistent with injection of grains condensed from the ejecta of a nearby (< 1 pc) supernova, into an already-formed protoplanetary disk.
During a core-collapse supernova, absorption of anti-nu_e emitted from the proto-neutron star by protons in the hydrogen envelope produces neutrons and positrons. Neutron capture on protons and positron annihilation then produce gamma rays of 2.22 and 0.511 MeV, respectively. We calculate the fluxes of these gamma rays expected from a supernova with an 11 M_sun progenitor. The flux from neutron capture on protons exponentially decays on a timescale of 564 s, which is determined by neutron decay and capture on protons and 3He nuclei. The peak flux is 2.38x10^{-7}/cm^2/s for a supernova at a distance of 1 kpc. In contrast, the gamma-ray flux from positron annihilation follows the time evolution of the anti-nu_e luminosity and lasts for ~10 s. The peak flux in this case is 6.8x10^{-5}/cm^2/s for a supernova at a distance of 1 kpc. Detection of the above gamma-ray fluxes is beyond the capability of current instruments, and perhaps even those planned for the near future. However, if such fluxes can be detected, they not only constitute a new kind of signals that occur during the gap of several hours between the neutrino signals and the optical display of a supernova, but may also provide a useful probe of the conditions in the surface layers of the supernova progenitor.
It is known that if neutrino is a Dirac fermion with magnetic moment, then \nu_L -> \nu_R -> \nu_L transition of supernova neutrinos may occur. The first stage of such transition is due to the neutrino spin flip inside the hot dense supernova core, while the second one - due to the neutrino spin precession in the galactic magnetic field on the way from the supernova to terrestrial detectors. This can result in the detection of 60-200 MeV neutrinos simultaneously with the "normal" supernova neutrino signal, which would be a smoking gun for the Dirac neutrino magnetic moment, \mu. We argue that in case of a nearby supernova explosion (~10 kpc away from the Earth) one may observe such high-energy events in Super-Kamiokande if \mu \gtrsim 10^{-13} \mu_B, and in a Mt-scale detector if \mu \gtrsim 0.5*10^{-13} \mu_B. Such an observation by itself, however, may be not sufficient to determine the value of the magnetic moment, because of the ignorance of the interstellar magnetic field. We point out that if in addition a deficit of the neutronization burst neutrinos is established, it would be possible to extract the value of the magnetic moment from observations. We also briefly discuss a possible Majorana magnetic moment signature due to \nu_e -> \bar{\nu}_{\mu,\tau} flip inside the supernova core.
We use three years of data from the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS) to study the general properties of core-collapse and type Ia supernovae. This is the first such study using the "rolling search" technique which guarantees well-sampled SNLS light curves and good efficiency for supernovae brighter than $i^\prime\sim24$. Using host photometric redshifts, we measure the supernova absolute magnitude distribution down to luminosities $4.5 {\rm mag}$ fainter than normal SNIa. Using spectroscopy and light-curve fitting to discriminate against SNIa, we find a sample of 117 core-collapse supernova candidates with redshifts $z<0.4$ (median redshift of 0.29) and measure their rate to be larger than the type Ia supernova rate by a factor $4.5\pm0.8(stat.) \pm0.6 (sys.)$. This corresponds to a core-collapse rate at $z=0.3$ of $[1.42\pm 0.3(stat.) \pm0.3(sys.)]\times10^{-4}\yr^{-1}(h_{70}^{-1}\Mpc)^{-3}$.
I summarize what we have learned about the nature of stars that ultimately explode as core-collapse supernovae from the examination of images taken prior to the explosion. By registering pre-supernova and post-supernova images, usually taken at high resolution using either space-based optical detectors, or ground-based infrared detectors equipped with laser guide star adaptive optics systems, nearly three dozen core-collapse supernovae have now had the properties of their progenitor stars either directly measured or (more commonly) constrained by establishing upper limits on their luminosities. These studies enable direct comparison with stellar evolution models that, in turn, permit estimates of the progenitor stars' physical characteristics to be made. I review progenitor characteristics (or constraints) inferred from this work for each of the major core-collapse supernova types (II-Plateau, II-Linear, IIb, IIn, Ib/c), with a particular focus on the analytical techniques used and the processes through which conclusions have been drawn. Brief discussion of a few individual events is also provided, including SN 2005gl, a type IIn supernova that is shown to have had an extremely luminous -- and thus very massive -- progenitor that exploded shortly after a violent, luminous blue variable-like eruption phase, contrary to standard theoretical predictions.
Meng, Chen & Han (2009) comprehensively and systemically studied the WD + MS system by detailed binary evolution calculations. Following their studies, we have carried out a series of binary population synthesis studies about the properties of the companions of SNe Ia for different metallicities $Z$. We present the distributions of the masses, $M_{\rm 2}^{\rm SN}$, the radii, $R_{\rm 2}^{\rm SN}$, of companions, and the periods, $P_{\rm SN}$, and the ratios of separations to radii, $A/R_{\rm 2}^{\rm SN}$, of WD + MS systems for various $Z$ at the moment of supernova explosion. These arameters can be applied to constrain the numerical simulation of the interaction between the ejecta of a supernova and its companion. We also show the distributions of some integral properties of companions, i.e. the mass, the space velocity and the surface gravity, for various $Z$ after the interaction. The distributions may help to search companion in a supernova remnant. All the parameters above significantly change with $Z$. Incorporating the simulation results of interaction between supernovae ejecta and companions in Marietta et al. (2000) and Kasen et al. (2004) into our binary population synthesis study, we found that more than 75% of all supernovae have enough polarization signal which can be detected by spectropolarimetric observations. We also found that 13 to 14 per cent SNe Ia belong to the supernovae like 1991T, which is consistent with observations within errors. This may indicate that SNe 1991T-like have not any special properties in physics except for the viewing angle of an observer.
Upcoming imaging surveys such as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope will repeatedly scan large areas of sky and have the potential to yield million-supernova catalogs. Type Ia supernovae are excellent standard candles and will provide distance measures that suffice to detect mean pairwise velocities of their host galaxies. We show that when combining these distance measures with photometric redshifts for either the supernovae or their host galaxies, the mean pairwise velocities of the host galaxies will provide a dark energy probe which is competitive with other widely discussed methods. Adding information from this test to type Ia supernova photometric luminosity distances from the same experiment, plus the cosmic microwave background power spectrum from the Planck satellite, improves the Dark Energy Task Force Figure of Merit by a factor of 1.8. Pairwise velocity measurements require no additional observational effort beyond that required to perform the traditional supernova luminosity distance test, but may provide complementary constraints on dark energy parameters and the nature of gravity. Incorporating additional spectroscopic redshift follow-up observations could provide important dark energy constraints from pairwise velocities alone. Mean pairwise velocities are much less sensitive to systematic redshift errors than the luminosity distance test or weak lensing techniques, and also are only mildly affected by systematic evolution of supernova luminosity.
The extremely luminous supernova 2006gy (SN 2006gy) is among the most energetic ever observed. The peak brightness was 100 times that of a typical supernova and it spent an unheard of 250 days at magnitude -19 or brighter. Efforts to describe SN 2006gy have pushed the boundaries of current supernova theory. In this work we aspire to simultaneously reproduce the photometric and spectroscopic observations of SN 2006gy using a quark nova model. This analysis considers the supernova explosion of a massive star followed days later by the quark nova detonation of a neutron star. We lay out a detailed model of the interaction between the supernova envelope and the quark nova ejecta paying special attention to a mixing region which forms at the inner edge of the supernova envelope. This model is then fit to photometric and spectroscopic observations of SN 2006gy. This QN model naturally describes several features of SN 2006gy including the late stage light curve plateau, the broad H{\alpha} line and the peculiar blue H{\alpha} absorption. We find that a progenitor mass between 20Msun and 40Msun provides ample energy to power SN 2006gy in the context of a QN.
IceCube was completed in December 2010. It forms a lattice of 5160 photomultiplier tubes that monitor a volume of ~ 1 cubic km in the deep Antarctic ice for particle induced photons. The telescope was designed to detect neutrinos with energies greater than 100 GeV. Owing to subfreezing ice temperatures, the photomultiplier dark noise rates are particularly low. Hence IceCube can also detect large numbers of MeV neutrinos by observing a collective rise in all photomultiplier rates on top of the dark noise. With 2 ms timing resolution, IceCube can track subtle features in the temporal development of the supernova neutrino burst. For a supernova at the galactic center, its sensitivity matches that of a background-free megaton-scale supernova search experiment. The sensitivity decreases to 20 standard deviations at the galactic edge (30 kpc) and 6 standard deviations at the Large Magellanic Cloud (50 kpc). IceCube is sending triggers from potential supernovae to the Supernova Early Warning System. The sensitivity to neutrino properties such as the neutrino hierarchy is discussed and simulations of tantalizing signatures, such as the formation of a quark star or a black hole as well as the characteristics of shock waves are presented. All results are preliminary.
We describe a new formalism to fit the parameters $\alpha$ and $\beta$ that are used in the SALT2 model to determine the standard magnitudes of Type Ia supernovae. The new formalism describes the intrinsic scatter in Type Ia supernovae by a covariance matrix in place of the single parameter normally used. We have applied this formalism to the Sloan Digital Sky Survey Supernova Survey (SDSS-II) data and conclude that the data are best described by $\alpha=0.135_{-.017}^{+.033}$ and $\beta=3.19_{-0.24}^{+0.14}$, where the error is dominated by the uncertainty in the form of the intrinsic scatter matrix. Our result depends on the introduction of a more general form for the intrinsic scatter of the distance moduli of Type Ia supernovae than is conventional, resulting in a larger value of $\beta$ and a larger uncertainty than the conventional approach. Although this analysis results in a larger value of $\beta$ and a larger error, the SDSS data differ (at a 98% confidence level) with $\beta=4.1$, the value expected for extinction by the type of dust found in the Milky Way. We have modeled the distribution of supernovae Ia in terms of their color and conclude that there is strong evidence that variation in color is a significant contributor to the scatter of supernovae Ia around their standard candle magnitude.
We present an analysis of Chandra observations of the position of ten nearby (< 25 Mpc) type Ia supernovae, taken before the explosions. No sources corresponding to progenitors were found in any of the observations. We calculated upper limits on the bolometric luminosities of the progenitors assuming black-body X-ray spectra with temperatures of 30-150 eV. This is inspired by the fact that luminous super-soft X-ray sources have been suggested as the direct progenitors of type Ia supernovae. The upper limits of two supernovae in our sample are comparable to the luminosities of the brightest observed super-soft sources, ruling out such sources as the progenitors of these supernovae. In contrast to Liu et al (2012) we find that for SN2011fe we can rule out Eddington luminosity systems for black body temperatures as low as 40 eV. Our findings are consistent with statistical studies comparing the observed type Ia supernova rate to the number of super-soft sources or the integrated X-ray luminosity in external galaxies. This suggest that either the progenitors of type Ia supernovae are not accreting, nuclear burning white dwarfs, or that they do not look like the classical super-soft sources, e.g. because they are obscured.
The most metal-poor stars in dwarf spheroidal galaxies (dSphs) can show the nucleosynthetic patterns of one or a few supernovae. These supernovae could have zero metallicity, making metal-poor dSph stars the closest surviving links to Population III stars. Metal-poor dSph stars also help to reveal the formation mechanism of the Milky Way halo. We present the detailed abundances from Keck/HIRES spectroscopy for two very metal-poor stars in two Milky Way dSphs. One star, in the Sculptor dSph, has [Fe I/H] = -2.40. The other star, in the Ursa Minor dSph, has [Fe I/H] = -3.16. Both stars fall in the previously discovered low-metallicity, high-[alpha/Fe] plateau. Most abundance ratios of very metal-poor stars in these two dSphs are largely consistent with very metal-poor halo stars. However, the abundances of Na and some r-process elements lie at the lower end of the envelope defined by inner halo stars of similar metallicity. We propose that the metallicity dependence of supernova yields is the cause. The earliest supernovae in low-mass dSphs have less gas to pollute than the earliest supernovae in massive halo progenitors. As a result, dSph stars at -3 < [Fe/H] < -2 sample supernovae with [Fe/H] << -3, whereas halo stars in the same metallicity range sample supernovae with [Fe/H] ~ -3. Consequently, enhancements in [Na/Fe] and [r/Fe] were deferred to higher metallicity in dSphs than in the progenitors of the inner halo.
A rare class of `super-luminous' supernovae that are about ten or more times more luminous at their peaks than other types of luminous supernovae has recently been found at low to intermediate redshifts. A small subset of these events have luminosities that evolve slowly and result in radiated energies of around 10^51 ergs or more. Therefore, they are likely examples of `pair-instability' or `pulsational pair-instability' supernovae with estimated progenitor masses of 100 - 250 times that of the Sun. These events are exceedingly rare at low redshift, but are expected to be more common at high redshift because the mass distribution of the earliest stars was probably skewed to high values. Here we report the detection of two super-luminous supernovae, at redshifts of 2.05 and 3.90, that have slowly evolving light curves. We estimate the rate of events at redshifts of 2 and 4 to be approximately ten times higher than the rate at low redshift. The extreme luminosities of super-luminous supernovae extend the redshift limit for supernova detection using present technology, previously 2.36, and provide a way of investigating the deaths of the first generation of stars to form after the Big Bang.
Core-collapse supernovae are among the most energetic cosmic cataclysms. They are prodigious emitters of neutrinos and quite likely strong galactic sources of gravitational waves. Observation of both neutrinos and gravitational waves from the next galactic or near extragalactic core-collapse supernova will yield a wealth of information on the explosion mechanism, but also on the structure and angular momentum of the progenitor star, and on aspects of fundamental physics such as the equation of state of nuclear matter at high densities and low entropies. In this contribution to the proceedings of the Neutrino 2012 conference, we summarize recent progress made in the theoretical understanding and modeling of core-collapse supernovae. In this, our emphasis is on multi-dimensional processes involved in the explosion mechanism such as neutrino-driven convection and the standing accretion shock instability. As an example of how supernova neutrinos can be used to probe fundamental physics, we discuss how the rise time of the electron antineutrino flux observed in detectors can be used to probe the neutrino mass hierarchy. Finally, we lay out aspects of the neutrino and gravitational-wave signature of core-collapse supernovae and discuss the power of combined analysis of neutrino and gravitational wave data from the next galactic core-collapse supernova.
We present an analytic model for bolometric light curves which are powered by the interaction between supernova ejecta and a dense circumstellar medium. This model is aimed at modeling Type IIn supernovae to determine the properties of their supernova ejecta and circumstellar medium. Our model is not restricted to the case of steady mass loss and can be applied broadly. We only consider the case in which the optical depth of the unshocked circumstellar medium is not high enough to affect the light curves. We derive the luminosity evolution based on an analytic solution for the evolution of a dense shell created by the interaction. We compare our model bolometric light curves to observed bolometric light curves of three Type IIn supernovae (2005ip, 2006jd, 2010jl) and show that our model can constrain their supernova ejecta and circumstellar medium properties. Our analytic model is supported by numerical light curves from the same initial conditions.
Some young, massive stars can be found in the Galactic halo. As star formation is unlikely to occur in the halo, they must have been formed in the disk and been ejected shortly afterwards. One explanation is a supernova in a tight binary system. The companion is ejected and becomes a runaway star. HD\,271791 is the kinematically most extreme runaway star known (Galactic restframe velocity $725 \pm 195\, \rm km\,s^{-1}$, which is even larger than the Galactic escape velocity). Moreover, an analysis of the optical spectrum showed an enhancement of the $\alpha$-process elements. This indicates the capture of supernova ejecta, and therefore an origin in a core-collapse supernova. As such high space velocities are not reached by the runaway stars in classical binary supernova ejection scenarios, a very massive but compact primary, probably of Wolf-Rayet type is required. HD\,271791 is therefore a perfect candidate for studying nucleosynthesis in a supernova of probably type Ibc. The goal of this project is to determine the abundances of a large number of elements from the $\alpha$-process, the iron group, and heavier elements by a quantitative analysis of the optical and UV spectral range. Detailed line-formation calculations are employed that account for deviations from local thermodynamic equilibrium (non-LTE). We intend to verify whether core-collapse supernova are a site of r-process element production. Here, we state the current status of the project.
It is commonly accepted that a neutron star is produced, when a massive star exhausts its nuclear fuel and ends its life in a core-collapse supernova explosion. This scenario is confirmed by the detection of pulsars, which are believed to be rapidly spinning neutron stars, in the central regions of many supernova remnants. Neutron stars and their associated supernova remnants should therefore have the same ages. As expected, the age of the Crab Pulsar, the first to be connected with a supernova remnant (the Crab Nebula), can be inferred from its current spin period and its derivative and indeed has about the same age of the supernova remnant, that was produced from a historically recorded supernova explosion in 1054. However most neutron stars appear to be much older than the ages of their associated supernova remnants, a puzzle not yet understood. Another puzzle is that so far no convincing evidence has been found in favor of magnetic field decay in neutron stars, that is predicted in most models of neutron stars. Here we show convincing evidence of magnetic field decay in some young neutron stars, and that the magnetic field decay can alter their spinning behaviors significantly such that these neutron stars appear much older than they really are.
In the last three decades, about 50 radio supernovae have been detected as a result of targeted searches of optically discovered supernovae in the local universe. Despite this relatively small number some diversity among them has already been identified which is an indication of the underlying richness of radio supernovae waiting to be discovered. For example, comparison of star formation and supernova discovery rate imply that as many as half of the supernovae remain undetected in the traditional optical searches, either because of intrinsic dimness or due to dust obscuration. This has far reaching consequences to the models of stellar and galaxy evolution. A radio sky survey would be ideal to uncover larger supernova population. Transient radio sky would benefit significantly from such a survey. With the advent of advanced gravitational wave detectors a new window is set to open on the local Universe. Localization of these gravitational detectors is poor to identify electromagnetic counterparts of the gravitational wave sources. However, the longer lasting radio emission accompanied in these sources could be effectively identified in a radio sky survey. We advocate a medium area ($\approx$ a few thousand $\rm deg^{2}$) radio sky survey at C-band. Alternatively, a survey at S-band has advantage of larger sky coverage without serious loss of the science case as presented here. Understanding the background in radio sky will be of paramount importance for the upcoming sensitive radio facilities including the Square Kilometer Array.
One of the key observables for determining the progenitor nature of Type Ia supernovae is provided by their immediate circumstellar medium, which according to several models should be shaped by the progenitor binary system. So far, X-ray and radio observations indicate that the surroundings are very tenuous, producing severe upper-limits on the mass loss from winds of the progenitors. In this study, we perform numerical hydro-dynamical simulations of the interaction of the SN ejecta with circumstellar structures formed by possible mass outflows from the progenitor systems and we estimate numerically the expected numerical X-ray luminosity. We consider two kinds of circumstellar structures: a) A circumstellar medium formed by the donor star's stellar wind, in case of a symbiotic binary progenitor system; b) A circumstellar medium shaped by the interaction of the slow wind of the donor star with consecutive nova outbursts for the case of a symbiotic recurrent nova progenitor system. For the hydro-simulations we used well-known Type Ia supernova explosion models, as well as an approximation based on a power law model for the density structure of the outer ejecta. We confirm the strict upper limits on stellar wind mass loss, provided by simplified interpretations of X-ray upper limits of Type Ia supernovae. However, we show that supernova explosions going off in the cavities created by repeated nova explosions, provide a possible explanation for the lack of X-ray emission from supernovae originating from symbiotic binaries. Moreover, the velocity structure of circumstellar medium, shaped by a series of nova explosion matches well with the Na absorption features seen in absorption toward several Type Ia supernovae.
For the first time the cross-correlation between type Ia supernova host galaxies and surrounding field galaxies is measured using the Supernova Legacy Survey sample. Over the z=0.2 to 0.9 redshift range we find that supernova hosts are correlated an average of 60% more strongly than similarly selected field galaxies over the 3-100 arcsec range and about a factor of 3 more strongly below 10 arcsec. The correlation errors are empirically established with a jackknife analysis of the four SNLS fields. The hosts are more correlated than the field at a significance of 99% in the fitted amplitude and slope, with the point-by-point difference of the two correlation functions having a reduced $\chi^2$ for 8 degrees of freedom of 4.3, which has a probability of random occurrence of less than 3x10^{-5}. The correlation angle is 1.5+/-0.5 arcsec, which deprojects to a fixed co-moving correlation length of approximately 6.5+/- 2/h mpc. Weighting the field galaxies with the mass and star formation rate supernova frequencies of the simple A+B model produces good agreement with the observed clustering. We conclude that these supernova clustering differences are primarily the expected outcome of the dependence of supernova rates on galaxy masses and stellar populations with their clustering environment.
We revise the assumptions of the parameters involved in predicting the number of supernova remnants detectable in the nuclear lines of the decay chain of 44Ti. Specifically, we consider the distribution of the supernova progenitors, the supernova rate in the Galaxy, the ratios of supernova types, the Galactic production of 44Ti, and the 44Ti yield from supernovae of different types, to derive credible bounds on the expected number of detectable remnants. We find that, within 1 sigma uncertainty, the Galaxy should contain an average of 5.1+2.4-2.0 remnants detectable to a survey with a 44Ti decay line flux limit of 10E-5 photons/cm2/s, with a probability of detecting a single remnant of (2.7+10.0-2.4)%, and an expected number of detections between 2 and 9 remnants, making the single detection of Cas A unlikely but consistent with our models. Our results show that the probability of detecting the brightest 44Ti flux source at the high absolute Galactic longitude of Cas A or above is ~10%. Using the detected flux of Cas A, we attempt to constrain the Galactic supernova rate and Galactic production of 44Ti, but find the detection to be only weakly informative. We conclude that even future surveys having 200 times more sensitivity than state-of-the art surveys can be guaranteed to detect only a few new remnants, with an expected number of detections between 8 and 21 at a limiting 44Ti decay flux of 10E-7 photons/cm2/s.
Frequent supernova explosions in compact starburst regions are a main shaper of these regions' interstellar media (ISM). In most starbursts, the supernova remnants blast open a hot phase that fills the regions and launches a superwind. Denser starbursts are too overpressured for hot wind formation, but supernovae still stir up the ISM. I argue that supernovae power ubiquitous turbulence through each of the starburst ISM phases, including the hot wind, and that a fluctuation dynamo amplifies magnetic fields until they are in equipartition with the turbulence. Supernovae can drive turbulence with speeds of ~1000 km/s in the hot wind and ~20 km/s in the cold molecular gas, depending on the outer scale. I predict magnetic field strengths of 70 muG in the Galactic Center starburst, 300 muG in M82 and NGC 253, and 2 mG in Arp 220's nuclei. The mean magnetic field strengths are a few times stronger in molecular gas than in hot winds, but do not vary strongly with density within a starburst. I explain how the dominance of supernova-driven turbulence leads to near equipartition between the components of starburst ISM. I also consider implications for cosmic ray (CR) diffusion in starbursts. The high amounts of power cascading to small scales could confine CRs very effectively in starbursts, so much that CR transport is dominated by the flow of gas rather than diffusion through the gas. In addition, I discuss the effects of turbulence on X-ray line width, the far-infrared--radio correlation, observed radio polarization, and Faraday rotation measures. Finally, I discuss the many questions raised regarding the physics of turbulence in starbursts.
Detecting supernova $\nu_e$ is essential for testing supernova and neutrino physics, but the yields are small and the backgrounds from other channels large, e.g., $\sim 10^2$ and $\sim 10^4$ events, respectively, in Super-Kamiokande. We develop a new way to isolate supernova $\nu_e$, using gadolinium-loaded water Cherenkov detectors. The forward-peaked nature of $\nu_e + e^- \rightarrow \nu_e + e^-$ allows an angular cut that contains the majority of events. Even in a narrow cone, near-isotropic inverse beta events, $\bar{\nu}_e + p \rightarrow e^+ + n$, are a large background. With neutron detection by radiative capture on gadolinium, the background events can be individually identified with high efficiency. The remaining backgrounds are smaller and can be measured separately, so they can be statistically subtracted. Super-Kamiokande with gadolinium could measure the total and average energy of supernova $\nu_e$ with $\sim$ $20\%$ precision or better each ($90\%$ C.L.). Hyper-Kamiokande with gadolinium could improve this by a factor of $\sim$ 5. This precision will allow powerful tests of supernova neutrino emission, neutrino mixing, and exotic physics. Unless very large liquid argon or liquid scintillator detectors are built, this is the only way to guarantee precise measurements of supernova $\nu_e$.
We analysed archival data of Chandra pre-explosion observations of the position of SN2014J in M82. No X-ray source at this position was detected in the data, and we calculated upper limits on the luminosities of the progenitor. These upper limits allow us to firmly rule out an unobscured supersoft X-ray source progenitor with a photospheric radius comparable to the radius of white dwarf near the Chandrasekhar mass (~1.38 M_sun) and mass accretion rate in the interval where stable nuclear burning can occur. However, due to a relatively large hydrogen column density implied by optical observations of the supernova, we cannot exclude a supersoft source with lower temperatures, kT < 80 eV. We find that the supernova is located in the centre of a large structure of soft diffuse emission, about 200 pc across. The mass, ~3x10^4 M_sun and short cooling time of the gas, tau_cool ~ 8 Myrs, suggest that it is a supernova-inflated super-bubble, associated with the region of recent star formation. If SN2014J is indeed located inside the bubble, it likely belongs to the prompt population of type Ia supernovae, with a delay time as short as ~ 50 Myrs. Finally, we analysed the one existing post-supernova Chandra observation and placed upper limit of ~ (1-2) 10^37 erg/s on the X-ray luminosity of the supernova itself.
The spectrum of the supernova relic neutrino (SRN) background from past stellar collapses including black hole formation (failed supernovae) is calculated. The redshift dependence of the black hole formation rate is considered on the basis of the metallicity evolution of galaxies. Assuming the mass and metallicity ranges of failed supernova progenitors, their contribution to SRNs is quantitatively estimated for the first time. Using this model, the dependences of SRNs on the cosmic star formation rate density, shock revival time and equation of state are investigated. The shock revival time is introduced as a parameter that should depend on the still unknown explosion mechanism of core collapse supernovae. The dependence on equation of state is considered for failed supernovae, whose collapse dynamics and neutrino emission are certainly affected. It is found that the low-energy spectrum of SRNs is mainly determined by the cosmic star formation rate density. These low-energy events will be observed in the Super-Kamiokande experiment with gadolinium-loaded water.
The description of nuclear reactions induced by supernova neutrinos has witnessed significant progress during the recent years. At the energies and momentum transfers relevant for supernova neutrinos neutrino-nucleus cross sections are dominated by allowed transitions, however, often with non-negligible contributions from (first) forbidden transitions. For several nuclei allowed Gamow-Teller strength distributions could be derived from charge-exchange reactions and from inelastic electron scattering data. Importantly the diagonalization shell model has been proven to accurately describe these data and hence became the appropriate tool to calculate the allowed contributions to neutrino-nucleus cross sections for supernova neutrinos. Higher multipole contributions are usually calculated within the framework of the Quasiparticle Random Phase Approximation, which describes the total strength and the position of the giant resonances quite well.   This manuscript reviews the recent progress achieved in calculating supernova-relevant neutrino-nucleus cross sections and discusses its verification by data. Moreover, the review summarizes also the impact which neutrino-nucleus reactions have on the dynamics of supernovae and on the associated nucleosynthesis. These include the absorption of neutrinos by nuclei (the inverse of nuclear electron capture which is the dominating weak-interaction process during collapse), inelastic neutrino-nucleus scattering and nuclear de-excitation by neutrino-pair emission. We also discuss the role of neutrino-induced reactions for the recently discovered $\nu p$ process, for the r-process and for the neutrino process, for which neutrino-nucleus reactions have the largest impact. Finally, we briefly review neutrino-nucleus reactions important for the observation of supernova neutrinos by earthbound detectors. (Abridged)
With an increasing number of superluminous supernovae (SLSNe) discovered the question of their origin remains open and causes heated debates in the supernova community. Currently, there are three proposed mechanisms for SLSNe: (1) pair-instability supernovae (PISN), (2) magnetar-driven supernovae, and (3) models in which the supernova ejecta interacts with a circumstellar material ejected before the explosion. Based on current observations of SLSNe, the PISN origin has been disfavoured for a number of reasons. Many PISN models provide overly broad light curves and too reddened spectra, because of massive ejecta and a high amount of nickel. In the current study we re-examine PISN properties using progenitor models computed with the GENEC code. We calculate supernova explosions with FLASH and light curve evolution with the radiation hydrodynamics code STELLA. We find that high-mass models (200 and 250 solar masses) at relatively high metallicity (Z=0.001) do not retain hydrogen in the outer layers and produce relatively fast evolving PISNe Type I and might be suitable to explain some SLSNe. We also investigate uncertainties in light curve modelling due to codes, opacities, the nickel-bubble effect and progenitor structure and composition.
We use the wide-field capabilities of the 2dF fibre positioner and the AAOmega spectrograph on the Anglo-Australian Telescope (AAT) to obtain redshifts of galaxies that hosted supernovae during the first three years of the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS). With exposure times ranging from 10 to 60 ksec per galaxy, we were able to obtain redshifts for 400 host galaxies in two SNLS fields, thereby substantially increasing the total number of SNLS supernovae with host galaxy redshifts. The median redshift of the galaxies in our sample that hosted photometrically classified Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) is 0.77, which is 25% higher than the median redshift of spectroscopically confirmed SNe Ia in the three-year sample of the SNLS. Our results demonstrate that one can use wide-field fibre-fed multi-object spectrographs on 4m telescopes to efficiently obtain redshifts for large numbers of supernova host galaxies over the large areas of sky that will be covered by future high-redshift supernova surveys, such as the Dark Energy Survey.
We present a set of photometric and spectroscopic observations of a bright Type Ib supernova SN 2012au from -6d until ~+150d after maximum. The shape of its early R-band light curve is similar to that of an average Type Ib/c supernova. The peak absolute magnitude is M_R=-18.7+-0.2 mag, which suggests that this supernova belongs to a very luminous group among Type Ib supernovae. The line velocity of He I {\lambda}5876 is about 15,000 km/s around maximum, which is much faster than that in a typical Type Ib supernova. From the quasi-bolometric peak luminosity of (6.7+-1.3)x10^(42) erg/s, we estimate the \Ni mass produced during the explosion as ~0.30 Msun. We also give a rough constraint to the ejecta mass 5-7 Msun and the kinetic energy (7-18)x10^(51) erg. We find a weak correlation between the peak absolute magnitude and He I velocity among Type Ib SNe. The similarities to SN 1998bw in the density structure inferred from the light curve model as well as the large peak bolometric luminosity suggest that SN 2012au had properties similar to energetic Type Ic supernovae.
Supernovae Type Ia display a complex relation with their host galaxies. An important prior to the fit of the supernovae's lightcurve is the distribution of host galaxy extinction values that can be encountered. The SDSS-SN project has published light curve fits using both MLCS2k2 and SALT2. We use the former fits extinction parameter ($A_V$) to map this distribution of extinction values.   We explore the dependence of this distribution on four observables; the inclination of the host galaxy disk, radial position of the supernova, redshift of the supernova and host, and the level of star-formation in the host galaxy. The distribution of $A_V$ values encountered by supernovae is typically characterised by: $\rm N_0 ~ e^{-A_V/\tau}$, with $\tau$= 0.4 or 0.33.   We find that the inclination correction using an infinitely thin disk for the SNIa is sufficient, resulting in similar exponential $A_V$ distributions for high- and low-inclination disks. The $A_V$ distribution also depends on the radial position in the disk, consistent with previous results on the transparency of spiral disks. The distribution of $A_V$ values narrows with increased star-formation, possibly due to the destruction or dispersion of the dusty ISM by stellar winds prior to the ignition of the supernova.   In future supernova searches, certainly the inclination of the host galaxy disk, should be considered in the construction of the \av \ prior with $\tau=0.4/cos(i)$ as the most likely prior in each individual host galaxy's case.
We examine the prospects for detecting supernova $\nu_e$ in JUNO, RENO-50, LENA, or other approved or proposed large liquid scintillator detectors. The main detection channels for supernova $\nu_e$ in a liquid scintillator are its elastic scattering with electrons and its charged-current interaction with the $^{12}$C nucleus. In existing scintillator detectors, the numbers of events from these interactions are too small to be very useful. However, at the 20-kton scale planned for the new detectors, these channels become powerful tools for probing the $\nu_e$ emission. We find that the $\nu_e$ spectrum can be well measured, to better than $\sim 40\%$ precision for the total energy and better than $\sim 25\%$ precision for the average energy. This is adequate to distinguish even close average energies, e.g., 11 MeV and 14 MeV, which will test the predictions of supernova models. In addition, it will help set constraints on neutrino mixing effects in supernovae by testing non-thermal spectra. Without such large liquid scintillator detectors (or Super-Kamiokande with added gadolinium, which has similar capabilities), supernova $\nu_e$ will be measured poorly, holding back progress on understanding supernovae, neutrinos, and possible new physics.
In this paper, we explore the effects of neutrino flavor oscillations on supernova nucleosynthesis and on the neutrino signals. Our study is based on detailed information about the neutrino spectra and their time evolution from a spherically-symmetric supernova model for an 18 M progenitor. We find that collective neutrino oscillations are not only sensitive to the detailed neutrino energy and angular distributions at emission, but also to the time evolution of both the neutrino spectra and the electron density profile. We apply the results of neutrino oscillations to study the impact on supernova nucleosynthesis and on the neutrino signals from a Galactic supernova. We show that in our supernova model, collective neutrino oscillations enhance the production of rare isotopes 138La and 180Ta but have little impact on the nu p-process nucleosynthesis. In addition, the adiabatic MSW flavor transformation, which occurs in the C/O and He shells of the supernova, may affect the production of light nuclei such as 7Li and 11B. For the neutrino signals, we calculate the rate of neutrino events in the Super-Kamiokande detector and in a hypothetical liquid argon detector. Our results suggest the possibility of using the time profiles of the events in both detectors, along with the spectral information of the detected neutrinos, to infer the neutrino mass hierarchy.
Massive stars having a CO core of $\sim$40-60 M$_\odot$ experience pulsational pair-instability (PPI) after carbon-burning. This instability induces strong pulsations of the whole star and a part of outer envelope is ejected. We investigate the evolution and mass ejection of metal-poor very massive stars which experience PPI. We use stellar models with initial masses of 140, 200, and 250 M$_\odot$ and the metallicity Z=0.004. Their masses decrease to 54.09, 58.65, and 61.03 M$_\odot$ before the neon-burning owing to mass-loss and He mass fraction at the surface becomes about 20%. During the PPI period of $\sim$1-2000 yr, they experience six, four, and three pulsations, respectively. The larger CO-core model has the longer PPI period and ejects the larger amount of mass. Since almost all surface He has been lost by the pulsations, these stars become Type Ic supernovae if they explode. Light curves during the PPI stage and supernovae are investigated and are implicated in luminous supernovae. The luminosity created by the interaction of different PPI ejecta becomes $M_{\rm bol} \sim -16$ to $-20$. The interaction between the circumstellar shell ejected by PPI and the supernova ejecta can be more luminous. These luminous transients could be an origin of Type I superluminous supernovae and supernovae with precursor.
Dark matter detectors that utilize liquid xenon have now achieved tonne-scale targets, giving them sensitivity to all flavours of supernova neutrinos via coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering. Considering for the first time a realistic detector model, we simulate the expected supernova neutrino signal for different progenitor masses and nuclear equations of state in existing and upcoming dual-phase liquid xenon experiments. We show that the proportional scintillation signal (S2) of a dual-phase detector allows for a clear observation of the neutrino signal and guarantees a particularly low energy threshold, while the backgrounds are rendered negligible during the supernova burst. XENON1T (XENONnT and LZ; DARWIN) experiments will be sensitive to a supernova burst up to 25 (35; 65) kpc from Earth at a significance of more than 5 sigma, observing approximately 35 (123; 704) events from a 27 Msun supernova progenitor at 10 kpc. Moreover, it will be possible to measure the average neutrino energy of all flavours, to constrain the total explosion energy, and to reconstruct the supernova neutrino light curve. Our results suggest that a large xenon detector such as DARWIN will be competitive with dedicated neutrino telescopes, while providing complementary information that is not otherwise accessible.
Many Type Ic superluminous supernovae have light-curve decline rates after their luminosity peak which are close to the nuclear decay rate of 56Co, consistent with the interpretation that they are powered by 56Ni and possibly pair-instability supernovae. However, their rise times are typically shorter than those expected from pair-instability supernovae, and Type Ic superluminous supernovae are often suggested to be powered by magnetar spin-down. If magnetar spin-down is actually a major mechanism to power Type Ic superluminous supernovae, it should be able to produce decline rates similar to the 56Co decay rate rather easily. In this study, we investigate the conditions for magnetars under which their spin-down energy input can behave like the 56Ni nuclear decay energy input. We find that an initial magnetic field strength within a certain range is sufficient to keep the magnetar energy deposition within a factor of a few of the 56Co decay energy for several hundreds of days. Magnetar spin-down needs to be by almost pure dipole radiation with the braking index close to 3 to mimic 56Ni in a wide parameter range. Not only late-phase 56Co-decay-like light curves, but also rise time and peak luminosity of most 56Ni-powered light curves can be reproduced by magnetars. Bolometric light curves for more than 700 days are required to distinguish the two energy sources solely by them. We expect that more slowly-declining superluminous supernovae with short rise times should be found if they are mainly powered by magnetar spin-down.
The future detection and measurement of the diffuse neutrino supernova background will shed light on the rate of supernovae events in the Universe, the star formation rate and the neutrino spectrum from each supernova. Little has been said about what those measurements will tell us about the expansion history of the universe. The purpose of this article is to show that the detection of the diffuse supernova neutrino background will be a complementary tool for the study and possible discrimination of cosmological models. In particular, we study three different cosmological models: the $\Lambda$ Cold Dark Matter model, the Logotropic universe and a bulk viscous matter-dominated universe. By fitting the free parameters of each model with the supernova Ia probe, we found that the predicted number of events computed with the best fit parameters for the $\Lambda$-Cold dark matter model and with the Logotropic model are the same, while a bulk viscous matter-dominated cosmological model predicts $\sim 3$ times more events. We show that the current limit set by Super-Kamiokande on the diffuse supernova neutrino background flux gives complementary constraints on the free parameters of a bulk viscous matter-dominated universe. Furthermore, this limit implies, within a $\Lambda$ Cold Dark Matter model, that the universe should be expanding with $H_0 > 21.5 ~\rm{Km/sec/Mpc}$ independently of the content of dark matter $\Omega_m$.
In classical P-Cygni profiles, theory predicts emission to peak at zero rest velocity. However, supernova spectra exhibit emission that is generally blue shifted. While this characteristic has been reported in many supernovae, it is rarely discussed in any detail. Here we present an analysis of H-alpha emission-peaks using a dataset of 95 type II supernovae, quantifying their strength and time evolution. Using a post-explosion time of 30d, we observe a systematic blueshift of H-alpha emission, with a mean value of -2000 kms-1. This offset is greatest at early times but vanishes as supernovae become nebular. Simulations of Dessart et al. (2013) match the observed behaviour, reproducing both its strength and evolution in time. Such blueshifts are a fundamental feature of supernova spectra as they are intimately tied to the density distribution of ejecta, which falls more rapidly than in stellar winds. This steeper density structure causes line emission/absorption to be much more confined; it also exacerbates the occultation of the receding part of the ejecta, biasing line emission to the blue for a distant observer. We conclude that blue-shifted emission-peak offsets of several thousand kms-1 are a generic property of observations, confirmed by models, of photospheric-phase type II supernovae.
To constrain the properties of the first stars with the chemical abundance patterns observed in metal-poor stars, one must identify any non-trivial effects that the hydrodynamics of metal dispersal can imprint on the abundances. We use realistic cosmological hydrodynamic simulations to quantify the distribution of metals resulting from one Population III supernova and from a small number of such supernovae exploding in close succession. Overall, supernova ejecta are highly inhomogeneously dispersed throughout the simulations. When the supernova bubbles collapse, quasi-virialized metal-enriched clouds, fed by fallback from the bubbles and by streaming of metal-free gas from the cosmic web, grow in the centers of the dark matter halos. Partial turbulent homogenization on scales resolved in the simulation is observed only in the densest clouds where the vortical time scales are short enough to ensure true homogenization on subgrid scales. However, the abundances in the clouds differ from the gross yields of the supernovae. Continuing the simulations until the cloud have gone into gravitational collapse, we predict that the abundances in second-generation stars will be deficient in the innermost mass shells of the supernova (if only one has exploded) or in the ejecta of the latest supernovae (when multiple have exploded). This indicates that hydrodynamics gives rise to biases complicating the identification of nucleosynthetic sources in the chemical abundance spaces of the surviving stars.
We revisit the effect of peculiar velocities on low-redshift type Ia supernovae. Velocities introduce an additional guaranteed source of correlations between supernova magnitudes that should be considered in all analyses of nearby supernova samples but has largely been neglected in the past. Applying a likelihood analysis to the latest compilation of nearby supernovae, we find no evidence for the presence of these correlations, although, given the significant noise, the data is also consistent with the correlations predicted for the standard $\Lambda$CDM model. We then consider the dipolar component of the velocity correlations -- the frequently studied "bulk velocity" -- and explicitly demonstrate that including the velocity correlations in the data covariance matrix is crucial for drawing correct and unambiguous conclusions about the bulk flow. In particular, current supernova data is consistent with no excess bulk flow on top of what is expected in $\Lambda$CDM and effectively captured by the covariance. We further clarify the nature of the apparent bulk flow that is inferred when the velocity covariance is ignored. We show that a significant fraction of this quantity is expected to be noise bias due to uncertainties in supernova magnitudes and not any physical peculiar motion.
Photoelectric heating has long been recognized as the primary source of heating for the neutral interstellar medium. Simulations of spiral galaxies found some indication that photoelectric heating could suppress star formation. However, simulations that include photoelectric heating have typically found that it has little effect on the rate of star formation in either spiral galaxies or dwarfs suggesting that supernovae and not photoelectric heating are responsible for setting the star formation law in galaxies. This result is in tension with recent work indicating that a star formation law that depends on galaxy metallicity, as expected for photoelectric heating but not for supernovae, reproduces the present-day galaxy population better than a metallicity-independent one. Here we report a series of simulations of dwarf galaxies, where the effects of both photoelectric heating and supernovae are expected to be strongest. We simultaneously include space- and time-dependent photoelectric heating, and we resolve the Sedov phase of every supernova blast wave, allowing us to make a direct measurement of the relative importance of momentum injection by supernovae and dust heating by far ultraviolet (FUV) photons in suppressing star formation. We find that supernovae are unable to account for the long observed gas depletion times in dwarf galaxies. Instead, ordinary photoelectric heating is the dominant means by which dwarf galaxies regulate their star formation rate at any given time, suppressing the star formation rate by more than an order of magnitude relative to simulations with only supernovae.
In this chapter I review the effects of supernovae explosions on the dynamical evolution of (1) binary stars and (2) star clusters.   (1) Supernovae in binaries can drastically alter the orbit of the system, sometimes disrupting it entirely, and are thought to be partially responsible for `runaway' massive stars - stars in the Galaxy with large peculiar velocities. The ejection of the lower-mass secondary component of a binary occurs often in the event of the more massive primary star exploding as a supernova. The orbital properties of binaries that contain massive stars mean that the observed velocities of runaway stars (10s - 100s km s$^{-1}$) are consistent with this scenario.   (2) Star formation is an inherently inefficient process, and much of the potential in young star clusters remains in the form of gas. Supernovae can in principle expel this gas, which would drastically alter the dynamics of the cluster by unbinding the stars from the potential. However, recent numerical simulations, and observational evidence that gas-free clusters are observed to be bound, suggest that the effects of supernova explosions on the dynamics of star clusters are likely to be minimal.
We present a new technique to infer dust locations towards reddened Type Ia supernovae and to help discriminate between an interstellar and a circumstellar origin for the observed extinction. Using Monte Carlo simulations, we show that the time-evolution of the light-curve shape and especially of the colour excess \ebv~places strong constraints on the distance between dust and the supernova. We apply our approach to two highly-reddened Type Ia supernovae for which dust distance estimates are available in the literature: SN 2006X and SN 2014J. For the former, we obtain a time-variable $E(B-V)$ and from this derive a distance of $27.5^{+9.0}_{-4.9}$ or $22.1^{+6.0}_{-3.8}$ pc depending on whether dust properties typical of the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) or the Milky Way (MW) are used. For the latter, instead, we obtain a constant $E(B-V)$ consistent with dust at distances larger than 50 and 38 pc for LMC$-$ and MW$-$type dust, respectively. Values thus extracted are in excellent agreement with previous estimates for the two supernovae. Our findings suggest that dust responsible for the extinction towards these supernovae is likely to be located within interstellar clouds. We also discuss how other properties of reddened Type Ia supernovae $-$ such as their peculiar extinction and polarization behaviour and the detection of variable, blue-shifted sodium features in some of these events $-$ might be compatible with dust and gas at interstellar-scale distances.
For pulsars born in supernovae, the expansion of the shocked pulsar wind nebula is initially in the freely expanding ejecta of the supernova. While the nebula is in the inner flat part of the ejecta density profile, the swept-up, accelerating shell is subject to the Rayleigh-Taylor instability. We carried out 2 and 3-dimensional simulations showing that the instability gives rise to filamentary structure during this initial phase but does not greatly change the dynamics of the expanding shell. The flow is effectively self-similar. If the shell is powered into the outer steep part of the density profile, the shell is subject to a robust Rayleigh-Taylor instability in which the shell is fragmented and the shocked pulsar wind breaks out through the shell. The flow is not self-similar in this phase. For a wind nebula to reach this phase requires that the deposited pulsar energy be greater than the supernova energy, or that the initial pulsar period be in the ms range for a typical $10^{51}$ erg supernova. These conditions are satisfied by some magnetar models for Type I superluminous supernovae. We also consider the Crab Nebula, which may be associated with a low energy supernova for which this scenario applies.
Hydrogen-rich core collapse supernovae, known as "Type II" supernovae, are the most common type of stellar explosion realized in nature. They are defined by the presence of prominent hydrogen lines in their spectra. Type II supernovae are observed only in star-forming galaxies, and several events have been directly linked to massive star progenitors. Five main subclasses are identified: Type IIP (displaying a plateau in their light curve), Type IIL (displaying a light curve decline), Type IIn (displaying narrow emission lines), Type IIb (displaying increasingly strong He features with time) and 87A-likes (displaying long-rising light curves similar to that of SN 1987A). Type IIP supernovae have been robustly established as the explosions of red supergiants, while the progenitors of Type IIL's remain elusive. Type IIn's are likely linked to luminous blue variables, Type IIb progenitors may be interacting binary systems and the prototype of the 87A-like class was observed to be the explosion of a blue supergiant. The diversity in progenitor mass, metallicity, binarity and rotation is likely responsible for the diversity in observed explosion types, but the connection between progenitor parameters and supernova properties is not yet entirely understood theoretically nor fully mapped observationally. New observational methods for constraining this connection are currently being implemented, including the analyses of large samples of events, making use of very early data (obtained hours to days from explosion) and statistical studies of host-galaxy properties.
In this paper, we first discuss a series of important but puzzling physical mechanisms concerning the energy source, various kinds of core collapsed supernovae explosion mechanisms during central gravitational collapse in astrophysics. We also discuss the puzzle of possible association of $\gamma$-ray burst with gravitational wave perturbation, the heat source for the molten interior of the core of the earth and finally the puzzling problem of the cooling of white dwarfs. We then make use of the estimations for the space flux of magnetic monopoles (hereafter MMs) and nucleon decay induced by MMs (called the Rubakov-Callen(RC) effect) to obtain the luminosity due to the RC effect. In terms of the formula for this RC luminosity, we present a unified treatment for the heat source of the Earth's core, the energy source for the white dwarf interior, various kinds of core collapsed supernovae (Type II Supernova (SNII), Type Ib Supernova (SNIb), Type Ic Supernova (SNIc), Super luminous supernova (SLSN)), and the production mechanism for $\gamma$-ray burst. This unified model can also be used to reasonably explain the possible association of the short $\gamma$-ray burst detected by the Fermi $\gamma$-ray Burst Monitoring Satellite (GBM) with the LIGO gravitational wave event GW150914 in September 2015.
Tycho's supernova remnant (SNR) has a periphery which clearly deviates from spherical shape bash on the X-ray and radio observations. The forward shock from the southeast to the north of the remnant has a relatively deformed outline with a depression in the east, although in the west it is generally round and smooth. Moreover, at some locations of the shell, the supernova ejecta distributes closely to the forward shock to produce protrusions. Using 3D hydrodynamical simulation, the dynamical evolution of the supernova ejecta in an inhomogeneous medium and the formation process of the profile of the forward shock can be studied. To reproduce the peculiar periphery of the remnant, we propose a model in which the supernova ejecta has evolved in a cavity blown by a latitude-dependent outflow. The results indicate that, with the assumptions of the wind bubble driven by the anisotropic wind with a mass loss rate of $\sim10^{-7} {\rm M_{\odot}}$~yr$^{-1}$, a pole velocity of $\sim 100$~km s$^{-1}$, a duration of $\sim10^5$~yr just before the supernova explosion, and a spatial velocity of $\sim 30$~km s$^{-1}$ of the progenitor with respect to the circumstellar medium, the depression to the east and the protrusion to the southeast on the observed periphery of the remnant can be generally reproduced. In conclusion, an explanation to the peculiar shape of the periphery of Tycho's SNR is the supernova ejecta evolved in the cavity driven by the latitude-dependent wind.
Core-collapse supernova explosions are driven by a central engine that converts a small fraction of the gravitational binding energy released during core collapse to outgoing kinetic energy. The suspected mode for this energy conversion is the neutrino mechanism, where a fraction of the neutrinos emitted from the newly formed protoneutron star are absorbed by and heat the matter behind the supernova shock. Accurate neutrino-matter interaction terms are crucial for simulating these explosions. In this proceedings for IAUS 331, SN 1987A, 30 years later, we explore several corrections to the neutrino-nucleon scattering opacity and demonstrate the effect on the dynamics of the core-collapse supernova central engine via two dimensional neutrino-radiation-hydrodynamics simulations. Our results reveal that the explosion properties are sensitive to corrections to the neutral-current scattering cross section at the 10-20% level, but only for densities at or above $\sim 10^{12}$ g cm$^{-3}$
A range of astronomical data indicates that ancient supernovae created the galactic environment of the Sun and sculpted the physical properties of the interstellar medium near the heliosphere. In this paper we review the characteristics of the local interstellar medium that have been affected by supernovae. The kinematics, magnetic field, elemental abundances, and configuration of the nearest interstellar material support the view that the Sun is at the edge of the Loop I superbubble, which has merged into the low density Local Bubble. The energy source for the higher temperature X-ray emitting plasma pervading the Local Bubble is uncertain. Winds from massive stars and nearby supernovae, perhaps from the Sco-Cen Association, may have contributed radioisotopes found in the geologic record and galactic cosmic ray population. Nested supernova shells in the Orion and Sco-Cen regions suggest spatially distinct sites of episodic star formation. The heliosphere properties vary with the pressure of the surrounding interstellar cloud. A nearby supernova would modify this pressure equilibrium and thereby severely disrupt the heliosphere as well as the local interstellar medium.
We present optical and ultraviolet photometry, and low resolution optical spectroscopy of the broad-line type Ic supernova SN 2014ad in the galaxy PGC 37625 (Mrk 1309), covering the evolution of the supernova during $-$5 to +87 d with respect to the date of maximum in $B$-band. A late phase spectrum obtained at +340 d is also presented. With an absolute $V$ band magnitude at peak of $M_{V}$ = $-$18.86 $\pm$ 0.23 mag, SN 2014ad is fainter than Gamma Ray Burst (GRB) associated supernovae, and brighter than most of the normal and broad-line type Ic supernovae without an associated GRB. The spectral evolution indicates the expansion velocity of the ejecta, as measured using the Si\,{\sc ii} line, to be as high as $\sim$ 33500 km\,s$^{-1}$ around maximum, while during the post-maximum phase it settles down at $\sim$ 15000 km\,s$^{-1}$. The expansion velocity of SN 2014ad is higher than all other well observed broad-line type Ic supernovae except the GRB associated SN 2010bh. The explosion parameters, determined by applying the Arnett's analytical light curve model to the observed bolometric light curve, indicate that it was an energetic explosion with a kinetic energy of $\sim$ (1 $\pm$ 0.3)$\times$10$^{52}$ ergs, a total ejected mass of $\sim$ (3.3 $\pm$ 0.8) M$_\odot$, and $\sim$ 0.24 M$_\odot$ of $^{56}$Ni was synthesized in the explosion. The metallicity of the host galaxy near the supernova region is estimated to be $\sim$ 0.5 Z$_\odot$.
We investigate broad-band emission from supernova ejecta powered by a relativistic wind from a central compact object. A recent two-dimensional hydrodynamic simulation studying the dynamical evolution of supernova ejecta with a central energy source has revealed that outermost layers of the ejecta are accelerated to mildly relativistic velocities because of the breakout of a hot bubble driven by the energy injection. The outermost layers decelerate as they sweep a circumstellar medium surrounding the ejecta, leading to the formation of the forward and reverse shocks propagating in the circumstellar medium and the ejecta. While the ejecta continue to release the internal energy as thermal emission from the photosphere, the energy dissipation at the forward and reverse shock fronts gives rise to non-thermal emission. We calculate light curves and spectral energy distributions of thermal and non-thermal emission from central engine powered supernova ejecta embedded in a steady stellar wind with typical mass loss rates for massive stars. The light curves are compared with currently available radio and X-ray observations of hydrogen-poor superluminous supernovae, as well as the two well-studied broad-lined Ic supernovae, 1998bw and 2009bb, which exhibit bright radio emission indicating central engine activities. We point out that upper limits on radio luminosities of nearby superluminous supernovae may indicate the injected energy is mainly converted to thermal radiation rather than creating mildly relativistic flows owing to photon diffusion time scales comparable to the injection time scale.
We present near-infrared spectroscopy of the NGC 5128 supernova SN 2016adj in the first 2 months following discovery. We report the detection of first overtone carbon monoxide emission at $\sim58.2$ d after discovery, one of the earliest detections of CO in an erupting supernova. We model the CO emission to derive the CO mass, temperature and velocity, assuming both pure $^{12}$CO and a composition that includes $^{13}$CO; the case for the latter is the isotopic analyses of meteoritic grains, which suggest that core collapse supernovae can synthesise significant amounts of $^{13}$C. Our models show that, while the CO data are adequately explained by pure $^{12}$CO, they do not preclude the presence of $^{13}$CO, to a limit of $^{12}$C/$^{13}$C $> 3$, the first constraint on the $^{12}$C/$^{13}$C ratio determined from near-infrared observations. We estimate the reddening to the object, and the effective temperature from the energy distribution at outburst. We discuss whether the ejecta of SN 2016adj may be carbon-rich, what the infrared data tell us about the classification of this supernova, and what implications the early formation of CO in supernovae may have for CO formation in supernovae in general.
We perform binary evolution calculations on helium star - carbon-oxygen white dwarf (CO WD) binaries using the stellar evolution code MESA. This single degenerate channel may contribute significantly to thermonuclear supernovae at short delay times. We examine the thermal-timescale mass transfer from a 1.1 - 2.0 $M_{\odot}$ helium star to a 0.90 - 1.05 $M_{\odot}$ CO WD for initial orbital periods in the range 0.05 - 1 day. Systems in this range may produce a thermonuclear supernova, helium novae, a helium star - oxygen-neon WD binary, or a detached double CO WD binary. Our time-dependent calculations that resolve the stellar structures of both binary components allow accurate distinction between the eventual formation of a thermonuclear supernova (via central ignition of carbon burning) and that of an ONe WD (in the case of off-center ignition). Furthermore, we investigate the effect of a slow WD wind which implies a specific angular momentum loss from the binary that is larger than typically assumed. We find that this does not significantly alter the region of parameter space over which systems evolve toward thermonuclear supernovae. Our determination of the correspondence between initial binary parameters and the final outcome informs population synthesis studies of the contribution of the helium donor channel to thermonuclear supernovae. In addition, we constrain the orbital properties and observable stellar properties of the progenitor binaries of thermonuclear supernovae and helium novae.
Short gamma-ray bursts result from mergers of two neutron stars or from collapsars, but probably at a smaller rate. In the first case, a kilonova occurs while in the second case a Type Ic supernova is expected. } {Even if future observations of kilonovae in association with gravitational wave events provide better data, detecting a kilonova during an afterglow follow-up would remain useful for exploring the diversity of the kilonova phenomenon. As supernovae produce a weaker gravitational signal, afterglow follow-up will be the only possible method to find one. In this work, we identify the conditions of the burst energy, external density, kilonova mass, supernova luminosity, that are necessary for the detection of a kilonova or supernova in the follow-up of short GRB afterglows.} {We have used a simple kilonova model to obtain the peak luminosities and times as a function of mass, expansion velocity and ejected matter opacity. Afterglow light curves are computed for a uniform medium and a stellar wind, in the kilonova and supernova cases, respectively.} {We represent, using diagrams of the burst kinetic energy vs. density of the external medium, the domains where the kilonova or supernova at maximum is brighter than the afterglow. %\LEt{Please check I have retained your intended meaning -> It's OK
Giant molecular clouds (GMCs) are believed to affect the biospheres of planets as their host star passes through them. We simulate the trajectories of stars and GMCs in the Galaxy and determine how often stars pass through GMCs. We find a strong decreasing dependence with Galactocentric radius, and with the velocity perpendicular to the Galactic plane, $V_z$. The \textit{XY}-component of the kinematic heating of stars was shown to not affect the GMC hit rate, unlike the \textit{Z}-dependence ($V_z$) implies that stars hit fewer GMCs as they age. GMCs are locations of star formation, therefore we also determine how often stars pass near supernovae. For the supernovae the decrease with $V_z$ is steeper as how fast the star passes through the GMC determines the probability of a supernova encounter. We then integrate a set of Sun-like trajectories to see the implications for the Sun. We find that the Sun hits $1.6\pm1.3$ GMCs per Gyr which results in $1.5\pm1.1$ or (with correction for clustering) $0.8\pm 0.6$ supernova closer than 10 pc per Gyr. The different supernova frequencies are from whether one considers multiple supernova per GMC crossing (few Myr) as separate events. We then discuss the effect of the GMC hits on the Oort cloud, and the Earth's climate due to accretion, we also discuss the records of distant supernova. Finally, we determine Galactic Habitable Zone using our model. For the thin disk we find it to lie between 5.8-8.7 kpc and for the thick disk to lie between 4.5-7.7 kpc.
The delay time distribution of Type Ia supernovae (the time-dependent rate of supernovae resulting from a burst of star formation) has been measured using different techniques and in different environments. Here, we study in detail the distribution for field galaxies, using the SDSS DR7 Stripe 82 supernova sample. We improve a technique we introduced earlier, which is based on galaxy color and luminosity, and is insensitive to details of the star formation history, to include the normalization. Assuming a power-law dependence of the supernova rate with time, ${\rm DTD}(t)=A(t/{\rm 1\,Gyr})^{s}$, we find a power-law index $s= -1.34 ^{+0.19} _{-0.17}$ and a normalization $\rm{log}\ A= -12.15 ^{+0.10} _{-0.13}\, {\rm dex}(M_\odot ^{-1}\, \rm{yr}^{-1})$, corresponding to a number of type Ia supernovae integrated over a Hubble time of $PE = 0.004^{+0.002} _{-0.001}\, M_\odot ^{-1}$. We also implement a method used by Maoz and collaborators, which is based on star formation history reconstruction, and find that this gives a consistent result for the slope, but a lower, marginally inconsistent normalization. With our normalization, the distribution for field galaxies is made consistent with that derived for cluster galaxies. Comparing the inferred distribution with predictions from different evolutionary scenarios for type Ia supernovae, we find that our results are intermediate between the various predictions and do not yet constraint the evolutionary path leading to SNe~Ia.
We investigate predicted circumstellar properties of Type Ia supernova progenitor systems with non-degenerate helium star donors. It has been suggested that systems consisting of a carbon+oxygen white dwarf and a helium star can lead to Type Ia supernova explosions. Binary evolution calculations for the helium star donor channel predict that such a progenitor system is in either a stable helium-shell burning phase or a weak helium-shell flash phase at the time of the Type Ia supernova explosion. By taking the binary evolution models from our previous study, we show that a large fraction of the progenitor systems with a helium star donor have low enough density to explain the current non-detection of radio emission from Type Ia supernovae. Most of the progenitor systems in the weak helium-shell flash phase at the time of the Type Ia supernova explosions, which may dominate the prompt (short delay time) Type Ia supernova population, have both low circumstellar density and a faint helium star donor to account for the non-detection of radio emission and a pre-explosion companion star in SN 2011fe and SN 2014J. We also find some progenitor systems that are consistent with the properties of the companion star candidate identified at the explosion location of Type Iax SN 2012Z.
There are now hundreds of publicly available supernova spectral time series. Radiative transfer modeling of this data gives insights into the physical properties of these explosions such as the composition, the density structure, or the intrinsic luminosity---this is invaluable for understanding the supernova progenitors, the explosion mechanism, or for constraining the supernova distance. However, a detailed parameter study of the available data has been out of reach due to the high dimensionality of the problem coupled with the still significant computational expense. We tackle this issue through the use of machine-learning emulators, which are algorithms for high-dimensional interpolation. These use a pre-calculated training dataset to mimic the output of a complex code but with run times orders of magnitude shorter. We present the application of such an emulator to synthetic type II supernova spectra generated with the TARDIS radiative transfer code. The results show that with a relatively small training set of 780 spectra we can generate emulated spectra with interpolation uncertainties of less than one percent. We demonstrate the utility of this method by automatic spectral fitting of two well-known type IIP supernovae; as an exemplary application, we determine the supernova distances from the spectral fits using the tailored-expanding-photosphere method. We compare our results to previous studies and find good agreement. This suggests that emulation of TARDIS spectra can likely be used to perform automatic and detailed analysis of many transient classes putting the analysis of large data repositories within reach.
The evidence of environmental dependence of Type Ia supernova luminosity has inspired recent discussion about whether the late-universe cosmic acceleration is still supported by supernova data. We adopt the $\Delta\mathrm{HR}/\Delta\mathrm{age}$ parameter, which describes the dependence of supernova absolute magnitude on the age of supernova progenitor, as an additional nuisance parameter. Using the Pantheon supernova data, a lower bound $\ge 12\,\mathrm{Gyr}$ on the cosmic age, and a Gaussian prior $H_0 = 70\pm 2\,\mathrm{km\,s^{-1}Mpc^{-1}}$ on the Hubble constant, we reconstruct the cosmic acceleration history. Within the flat $\Lambda$ cold dark matter ($\Lambda$CDM) framework, we still find a $5.6\sigma$ detection of cosmic acceleration. This is because a matter dominated decelerating universe would be too young to accommodate observed old stars with age $\gtrsim 12\,\mathrm{Gyr}$. A decelerating but non-flat universe is marginally consistent with the data, however, only in the presence of a negative spatial curvature $\sim$ two orders of magnitude beyond the current constraint from cosmic microwave background data. Finally, we propose a more general Parameterization based on the cosmic Age (PAge), which is {\it not} directly tied to the dark energy concept and hence is ideal for a null test of the cosmic acceleration. We find that, for a magnitude evolution rate $\Delta\mathrm{HR}/\Delta\mathrm{age} \lesssim 0.3\,\mathrm{mag}/5.3\,\mathrm{Gyr}$ (Kang et al 2019), a spatially flat and decelerating PAge universe is fully consistent with the supernova data and the cosmic age bound, and has no tension with the geometric constraint from the observed CMB acoustic angular scales.
The spectrum of the supernova relic neutrino background (SRN) from collapse-driven supernovae ever occurred in the universe is calculated by using a realistic, time-dependent supernova rate derived from a standard model of galaxy evolution based on the population synthesis method. The SRN spectrum we show here is the most realistic at present, because the largest uncertainty in previous theoretical predictions has come from unrealistic assumptions of the supernova rate so far made. The SRN is one of the targets of the Superkamiokande (SK) detector which will be constructed in a year and the SRN, if at all detected, would provide a new tool to probe the history of supernova explosions in the universe. The expected event rate at the SK is therefore calculated in this paper. Our major results include: (1) the supernova rate is much higher in the early phase of evolution of galaxies and there appears a hump in the SRN spectrum in the low-energy region of $\ltilde 5$ MeV, (2) the SRN flux depends on the Hubble constant ($H_0$) in a way approximately proportional to $H_0^2$ and only weakly on the density parameter of the universe ($\Omega_0$) and a cosmological constant ($\lambda_0$), and (3) the plausible event rate at the SK is 1.2 yr$^{-1}$ in the observable energy range. Such a low event rate is due mainly to a quite low supernova rate at present which is averaged over the morphological types of galaxies. The most optimistic rate in our model is found to be 4.7 yr$^{-1}$, and if more events are detected, we will have to reconsider our current understanding of collapse-driven supernovae and evolution of galaxies.
We have developed a technique to systematically discover and study high-redshift supernovae that can be used to measure the cosmological parameters. We report here results based on the initial seven of >28 supernovae discovered to date in the high-redshift supernova search of the Supernova Cosmology Project. We find a dispersion in peak magnitudes of sigma_{M_B} = 0.27 this dispersion narrows to sigma_{M_B,corr} = 0.19 after "correcting" the magnitudes using the light-curve "width-luminosity" relation found for nearby (z <= 0.1) type Ia supernovae from the Calan/Tololo survey (Hamuy et al. 1996). Comparing lightcurve-width-corrected magnitudes as a function of redshift of our distant (z = 0.35-0.46) supernovae to those of nearby type Ia supernovae yields a global measurement of the mass density, Omega_M = 0.88^{+0.69}_{-0.60} for a Lambda = 0 cosmology. For a spatially flat universe (i.e., Omega_M +Omega_Lambda = 1), we find Omega_M = 0.94 ^{+0.34}_{-0.28} or, equivalently, a measurement of the cosmological constant, Omega_Lambda = 0.06 ^{+0.28}_{-0.34} (<0.51 at the 95% confidence level). For the more general Friedmann-Lemaitre cosmologies with independent Omega_M and Omega_Lambda, the results are presented as a confidence region on the Omega_M-Omega_Lambda plane. This region does not correspond to a unique value of the deceleration parameter q_0. We present analyses and checks for statistical and systematic errors, and also show that our results do not depend on the specifics of the width-luminosity correction. The results for Omega_Lambda-versus-Omega_M are inconsistent with Lambda-dominated, low density, flat cosmologies that have been proposed to reconcile the ages of globular cluster stars with higher Hubble constant values.
We show that (1) the newly discovered supernova remnant (SNR), GRO J0852--4642/RX J0852.0--4622, was created by a core-collapse supernova of a massive star, and (2) the same supernova event which produced the $^{44}$Ti detected by COMPTEL from this source is probably also responsible for a large fraction of the observed $^{26}$Al emission in the Vela region detected by the same instrument. The first conclusion is based on the fact that the remnant is currently expanding too slowly given its young age for it to be caused by a Type Ia supernova. If the current SNR shell expansion speed is greater than 3000 km/s, a $15 M_\odot$ Type II supernova with a moderate kinetic energy exploding at about 150 pc away is favored. If the SNR expansion speed is lower than 2000 km s$^{-1}$, as derived naively from the X-ray data, a much more energetic supernova is required to have occurred at $\sim250$ pc away in a dense environment at the edge of the Gum nebula. This progenitor has a preferred ejecta mass of $\le10 M_\odot$ and therefore, it is probably a Type Ib or Type Ic supernova. However, the required high ambient density of $n_H \ge 100 cm^{-3}$ in this scenario is difficult to reconcile with the regional CO data. A combination of our estimates of the age/energetics of the new SNR and the almost perfect positional coincidence of the new SNR with the centroid of the COMPTEL $ ^{26}$Al emission feature of the Vela region strongly favors a causal connection. If confirmed, this will be the first case where both $^{44}$Ti and $^{26}$Al are detected from the same young SNR and together they can be used to select preferred theoretical core-collapse supernova models.
Estimates made in the 1970's indicated that a supernova occurring within tens of parsecs of Earth could have significant effects on the ozone layer. Since that time, improved tools for detailed modeling of atmospheric chemistry have been developed to calculate ozone depletion, and advances have been made in theoretical modeling of supernovae and of the resultant gamma-ray spectra. In addition, one now has better knowledge of the occurrence rate of supernovae in the galaxy, and of the spatial distribution of progenitors to core-collapse supernovae. We report here the results of two-dimensional atmospheric model calculations that take as input the spectral energy distribution of a supernova, adopting various distances from Earth and various latitude impact angles. In separate simulations we calculate the ozone depletion due to both gamma-rays and cosmic rays. We find that for the combined ozone depletion roughly to double the ``biologically active'' UV flux received at the surface of the Earth, the supernova must occur at <8 pc. Based on the latest data, the time-averaged galactic rate of core-collapse supernovae occurring within 8 pc is ~1.5/Gyr. In comparing our calculated ozone depletions with those of previous studies, we find them to be significantly less severe than found by Ruderman (1974), and consistent with Whitten et al. (1976). In summary, given the amplitude of the effect, the rate of nearby supernovae, and the ~Gyr time scale for multicellular organisms on Earth, this particular pathway for mass extinctions may be less important than previously thought.
We present the results from an Hubble Space Telescope/ACS search for supernovae associated with X-ray flashes 020903, 040701, 040812 and 040916. We find strong evidence that XRF 020903 (z=0.25) was associated with a SN 1998bw-like supernova and confirm this using optical spectroscopy at t ~ 25 days. We find no evidence, however, for SN 1998bw-like supernovae associated with the other three events. In the case of XRF 040701 (z=0.21), we rule out even a faint supernova similar to SN 2002ap, using template light-curves for several local Type Ic supernovae. For the two cases in which the redshift is not known, XRFs 040812 and 040916, we derive robust redshift limits assuming they were accompanied by supernovae similar to SN 1998bw and compare these limits with photometric redshift constraints provided by their host galaxies. We supplement this analysis with results for three additional events (XRFs 011030, 020427 and 030723) and discuss the observed diversity of supernovae associated with X-ray flashes and gamma-ray bursts. We conclude that XRF-SNe exist, but can be significantly fainter than SN 1998bw, possibly consistent with the observed spread in local Type Ibc supernovae.
According to standard models supernovae produce radioactive $^{44}$Ti, which should be visible in gamma-rays following decay to $^{44}$Ca for a few centuries. $^{44}Ti production is believed to be the source of cosmic $^{44}$Ca, whose abundance is well established. Yet, gamma-ray telescopes have not seen the expected young remnants of core collapse events. The $^{44}$Ti mean life of $\tau \simeq$ 89 y and the Galactic supernova rate of $\simeq$ 3/100 y imply $\simeq$ several detectable $^{44}Ti gamma-ray sources, but only one is clearly seen, the 340-year-old Cas A SNR. Furthermore, supernovae which produce much $^{44}Ti are expected to occur primarily in the inner part of the Galaxy, where young massive stars are most abundant. Because the Galaxy is transparent to gamma-rays, this should be the dominant location of expected gamma-ray sources. Yet the Cas A SNR as the only one source is located far from the inner Galaxy (at longitude 112 degree). We evaluate the surprising absence of detectable supernovae from the past three centuries. We discuss whether our understanding of SN explosions, their $^{44}Ti yields, their spatial distributions, and statistical arguments can be stretched so that this apparent disagreement may be accommodated within reasonable expectations, or if we have to revise some or all of the above aspects to bring expectations in agreement with the observations. We conclude that either core collapse supernovae have been improbably rare in the Galaxy during the past few centuries, or $^{44}Ti-producing supernovae are atypical supernovae. We also present a new argument based on $^{44}$Ca/$^{40}$Ca ratios in mainstream SiC stardust grains that may cast doubt on massive-He-cap Type I supernovae as the source of most galactic $^{44}$Ca.
The final fate of massive stars depends on many factors, including mass, rotation rate, magnetic fields and metallicity. Theory suggests that some massive stars (initially greater than 25-30 solar masses) end up as Wolf-Rayet stars which are deficient in hydrogen because of mass loss through strong stellar winds. The most massive of these stars have cores which may form a black hole and theory predicts that the resulting explosion produces ejecta of low kinetic energy, a faint optical display and a small mass fraction of radioactive nickel(1,2,3). An alternative origin for low energy supernovae is the collapse of the oxygen-neon core of a relatively lowmass star (7-9 solar masses) through electron capture(4,5). However no weak, hydrogen deficient, core-collapse supernovae are known. Here we report that such faint, low energy core-collapse supernovae do exist, and show that SN2008ha is the faintest hydrogen poor supernova ever observed. We propose that other similar events have been observed but they have been misclassified as peculiar thermonuclear supernovae (sometimes labelled SN2002cx-like events(6)). This discovery could link these faint supernovae to some long duration gamma-ray bursts. Extremely faint, hydrogen-stripped core-collapse supernovae have been proposed to produce those long gamma-ray bursts whose afterglows do not show evidence of association with supernovae (7,8,9).
Our aim is to show how different hypotheses about Type Ia supernova progenitors can affect Galactic chemical evolution. We include different Type Ia SN progenitor models, identified by their distribution of time delays, in a very detailed chemical evolution model for the Milky Way which follows the evolution of several chemical species. We test the single degenerate and the double degenerate models for supernova Ia progenitors, as well as other more empirical models based on differences in the time delay distributions. We find that assuming the single degenerate or the double degenerate scenario produces negligible differences in the predicted [O/Fe] vs. [Fe/H] relation. On the other hand, assuming a percentage of prompt (exploding in the first 100 Myr) Type Ia supernovae of 50%, or that the maximum Type Ia rate is reached after 3-4 Gyr from the beginning of star formation, as suggested by several authors, produces more noticeable effects on the [O/Fe] trend. However, given the spread still existing in the observational data no model can be firmly excluded on the basis of only the [O/Fe] ratios. On the other hand, when the predictions of the different models are compared with the G-dwarf metallicity distribution, the scenarios with very few prompt Type Ia supernovae can be excluded. Models including the single degenerate or double degenerate scenario with a percentage of 10-13% of prompt Type Ia supernovae produce results in very good agreement with the observations. A fraction of prompt Type Ia supernovae larger than 30% worsens the agreement with observations and the same occurs if no prompt Type Ia supernovae are allowed. In particular, two empirical models for the Type Ia SN progenitors can be excluded: the one without prompt Type Ia supernovae and the one assuming delay time distribution going like t^{-0.5}.
Massive galaxy clusters at intermediate redshift can magnify the flux of distant background sources by several magnitudes and we exploit this effect to search for lensed distant supernovae that may otherwise be too faint to be detected. A supernova search was conducted at near infrared wavelengths using the ISAAC instrument at the VLT. The galaxy clusters Abell 1689, Abell 1835 and AC114 were observed at multiple epochs of 2 hours of exposure time, separated by a month. Image-subtraction techniques were used to search for transient objects with light curve properties consistent with supernovae, both in our new and archival ISAAC/VLT data. The limiting magnitude of the individual epochs was estimated by adding artificial stars to the subtracted images. Most of the epochs reach 90% detection efficiency at SZ(J) ~= 23.8-24.0 mag (Vega). Two transient objects, both in archival images of Abell 1689 and AC114, were detected. The transient in AC114 coincides - within the position uncertainty - with an X-ray source and is likely to be a variable AGN at the cluster redshift. The transient in Abell 1689 was found at SZ=23.24 mag, ~0.5 arcsec away from a galaxy with photometric redshift z=0.6 +/-0.15. The light curves and the colors of the transient are consistent with a reddened Type IIP supernova at redshift z=0.59 +/- 0.05. The lensing model of Abell 1689 predicts ~1.4 mag of magnification at the position of the transient, making it the most magnified supernova ever found and only the second supernova found behind a galaxy cluster. Our pilot survey has demonstrated the feasibility to find distant gravitationally magnified supernovae behind massive galaxy clusters. One likely supernova was found behind Abell 1689, in accordance with the expectations for this survey, as shown in an accompanying analysis paper.
Aims: To gain better insight on the physics of stripped-envelope core-collapse supernovae through studying their environments. Methods: We obtained low-resolution optical spectroscopy with the New Technology Telescope (+ EFOSC2) at the locations of 20 Type Ib/c supernovae. We measure the flux of emission lines in the stellar-continuum-subtracted spectra from which local metallicities are computed. For the supernova regions we estimate both the mean stellar age, interpreting the stellar absorption with population synthesis models, and the age of the youngest stellar populations using the H-alpha equivalent width as an age indicator. These estimates are compared with the lifetimes of single massive stars. Results: Based on our sample, we detect a tentative indication that Type Ic supernovae might explode in environments that are more metal-rich than those of Type Ib supernovae (average difference of 0.08 dex), but this is not a statistically significant result. The lower limits placed on the ages of the supernova birthplaces are overall young, although there are several cases where these appear older than what is expected for the evolution of single stars more massive than 25-30 M_{sun}. This is only true, however, assuming that the supernova progenitors were born during an instantaneous (not continuous) episode of star formation. Conclusions: These results do not conclusively favor any of the two evolutionary paths (single or binary) leading to stripped supernovae. We do note a fraction of events for which binary evolution is more likely, due to their associated age limits. The fact, however, that the supernova environments contain areas of recent (< 15 Myr) star formation and that the environmental metallicities are, at least, not against the single evolutionary scenario, suggest that this channel is also broadly consistent with the observations.
Supernova cosmology without spectroscopic confirmation is an exciting new frontier which we address here with the Bayesian Estimation Applied to Multiple Species (BEAMS) algorithm and the full three years of data from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey II Supernova Survey (SDSS-II SN). BEAMS is a Bayesian framework for using data from multiple species in statistical inference when one has the probability that each data point belongs to a given species, corresponding in this context to different types of supernovae with their probabilities derived from their multi-band lightcurves. We run the BEAMS algorithm on both Gaussian and more realistic SNANA simulations with of order 10^4 supernovae, testing the algorithm against various pitfalls one might expect in the new and somewhat uncharted territory of photometric supernova cosmology. We compare the performance of BEAMS to that of both mock spectroscopic surveys and photometric samples which have been cut using typical selection criteria. The latter typically are either biased due to contamination or have significantly larger contours in the cosmological parameters due to small data-sets. We then apply BEAMS to the 792 SDSS-II photometric supernovae with host spectroscopic redshifts. In this case, BEAMS reduces the area of the (\Omega_m,\Omega_\Lambda) contours by a factor of three relative to the case where only spectroscopically confirmed data are used (297 supernovae). In the case of flatness, the constraints obtained on the matter density applying BEAMS to the photometric SDSS-II data are \Omega_m(BEAMS)=0.194\pm0.07. This illustrates the potential power of BEAMS for future large photometric supernova surveys such as LSST.
We show model light curves of superluminous supernova 2006gy on the assumption that the supernova is powered by the collision of supernova ejecta and its dense circumstellar medium. The initial conditions are constructed based on the shock breakout condition, assuming that the circumstellar medium is dense enough to cause the shock breakout within it. We perform a set of numerical light curve calculations by using a one-dimensional multigroup radiation hydrodynamics code STELLA. We succeeded in reproducing the overall features of the early light curve of SN 2006gy with the circumstellar medium whose mass is about 15 Msun (the average mass-loss rate ~ 0.1 Msun/yr). Thus, the progenitor of SN 2006gy is likely a very massive star. The density profile of the circumstellar medium is not well constrained by the light curve modeling only, but our modeling disfavors the circumstellar medium formed by steady mass loss. The ejecta mass is estimated to be comparable to or less than 15 Msun and the explosion energy is expected to be more than 4e51 erg. No 56Ni is required to explain the early light curve. We find that the multidimensional effect, e.g., the Rayleigh-Taylor instability, which is expected to take place in the cool dense shell between the supernova ejecta and the dense circumstellar medium, is important in understanding supernovae powered by the shock interaction. We also show the evolution of the optical and near-infrared model light curves of high-redshift superluminous supernovae. They can be potentially used to identify SN 2006gy-like superluminous supernovae in the future optical and near-infrared transient surveys.
Primordial stars are key to primeval structure formation as the first stellar components of primeval galaxies, the sources of cosmic chemical enrichment and likely cosmic reionization, and they possibly gave rise to the supermassive black holes residing at the centres of galaxies today. While the direct detection of individual Pop III stars will likely remain beyond reach for decades to come, we show their supernova remnants may soon be detectable in the radio. We calculate radio synchrotron signatures between 0.5 - 35 GHz from hydrodynamical computations of the supernova remnants of Pop III stars in minihaloes. We find that hypernovae yield the brightest systems, with observed radio fluxes as high as 1 - 10 muJy. Less energetic Type II supernovae yield remnants about a factor of 30 dimmer and pair-instability supernova remnants are dimmer by a factor of more than 10,000. Because of the high gas densities of the progenitor environments, synchrotron losses severely limit the maximum emission frequencies, producing a distinctive peaked radio spectrum distinguishable from normal galactic supernova remnant spectra. Hypernovae radio remnants should be detectable by existing radio facilities like eVLA and eMERLIN while Type II supernova remnants will require the Square Kilometre Array. The number counts of hypernova remnants at z > 20 with fluxes above 1 muJy are expected to be one per hundred square degree field, increasing to a few per square degree if they form down to z = 10. The detection of a z > 20 Type II supernova remnant brighter than 1 nJy would require a 100 - 200 square degree field, although only a 1 - 2 square degree field for those forming down to z = 10. Hypernova and Type II supernova remnants are easily separated from one another by their light curves, which will enable future surveys to use them to constrain the initial mass function of Pop III stars.
Integral field spectroscopy of 11 type-Ib/c supernova explosion sites in nearby galaxies has been obtained using UH88/SNIFS and Gemini-N/GMOS. The use of integral field spectroscopy enables us to obtain both spatial and spectral information of the explosion site, allowing the identification of the parent stellar population of the supernova progenitor star. The spectrum of the parent population provides metallicity determination via strong-line method and age estimation obtained via comparison with simple stellar population (SSP) models. We adopt this information as the metallicity and age of the supernova progenitor, under the assumption that it was coeval with the parent stellar population. The age of the star corresponds to its lifetime, which in turn gives the estimate of its initial mass. With this method we were able to determine both the metallicity and initial (ZAMS) mass of the progenitor stars of the type Ib and Ic supernovae. We found that on average SN Ic explosion sites are more metal-rich and younger than SN Ib sites. The initial mass of the progenitors derived from parent stellar population age suggests that SN Ic have more massive progenitors than SN Ib. In addition, we also found indication that some of our SN progenitors are less massive than ~25 Msun, indicating that they may have been stars in a close binary system that have lost their outer envelope via binary interactions to produce Ib/c supernovae, instead of single Wolf-Rayet stars. These findings support the current suggestions that both binary and single progenitor channels are in effect in producing type Ib/c supernovae. This work also demonstrates the power of integral field spectroscopy in investigating supernova environments and active star forming regions.
We present spectra and lightcurves of SNLS 06D4eu and SNLS 07D2bv, two hydrogen-free superluminous supernovae discovered by the Supernova Legacy Survey. At z = 1.588, SNLS 06D4eu is the highest redshift superluminous SN with a spectrum, at M_U = -22.7 is one of the most luminous SNe ever observed, and gives a rare glimpse into the restframe ultraviolet where these supernovae put out their peak energy. SNLS 07D2bv does not have a host galaxy redshift, but based on the supernova spectrum, we estimate it to be at z ~ 1.5. Both supernovae have similar observer-frame griz lightcurves, which map to restframe lightcurves in the U-band and UV, rising in ~ 20 restframe days or longer, and declining over a similar timescale. The lightcurves peak in the shortest wavelengths first, consistent with an expanding blackbody starting near 15,000 K and steadily declining in temperature. We compare the spectra to theoretical models, and identify lines of C II, C III, Fe III, and Mg II in the spectrum of SNLS 06D4eu and SCP 06F6, and find that they are consistent with an expanding explosion of only a few solar masses of carbon, oxygen, and other trace metals. Thus the progenitors appear to be related to those suspected for SNe Ic. A high kinetic energy, 10^52 ergs, is also favored. Normal mechanisms of powering core- collapse or thermonuclear supernovae do not seem to work for these supernovae. We consider models powered by 56Ni decay and interaction with circumstellar material, but find that the creation and spin-down of a magnetar with a period of 2ms, magnetic field of 2 x 10^14 Gauss, and a 3 solar mass progenitor provides the best fit to the data.
We study the characteristics of a narrow band type Ia supernova survey through simulations based on the upcoming Javalambre Physics of the accelerating universe Astrophysical Survey (J-PAS). This unique survey has the capabilities of obtaining distances, redshifts, and the SN type from a single experiment thereby circumventing the challenges faced by the resource-intensive spectroscopic follow-up observations. We analyse the flux measurements signal-to-noise ratio and bias, the supernova typing performance, the ability to recover light curve parameters given by the SALT2 model, the photometric redshift precision from type Ia supernova light curves and the effects of systematic errors on the data. We show that such a survey is not only feasible but may yield large type Ia supernova samples (up to 250 supernovae at $z<0.5$ per month of search) with low core collapse contamination ($\sim 1.5$ per cent), good precision on the SALT2 parameters (average $\sigma_{m_B}=0.063$, $\sigma_{x_1}=0.47$ and $\sigma_c=0.040$) and on the distance modulus (average $\sigma_{\mu}=0.16$, assuming an intrinsic scatter $\sigma_{\mathrm{int}}=0.14$), with identified systematic uncertainties $\sigma_{\mathrm{sys}}\lesssim 0.10 \sigma_{\mathrm{stat}}$. Moreover, the filters are narrow enough to detect most spectral features and obtain excellent photometric redshift precision of $\sigma_z=0.005$, apart from $\sim$ 2 per cent of outliers. We also present a few strategies for optimising the survey's outcome. Together with the detailed host galaxy information, narrow band surveys can be very valuable for the study of supernova rates, spectral feature relations, intrinsic colour variations and correlations between supernova and host galaxy properties, all of which are important information for supernova cosmological applications.
We examine the correlation between supernova host galaxy properties and their residuals on the Hubble diagram. We use supernovae discovered during the Sloan Digital Sky Survey II - Supernova Survey, and focus on objects at a redshift of z < 0.15, where the selection effects of the survey are known to yield a complete Type Ia supernova sample. To minimize the bias in our analysis with respect to measured host-galaxy properties, spectra were obtained for nearly all hosts, spanning a range in magnitude of -23 < M_r < -17. In contrast to previous works that use photometric estimates of host mass as a proxy for global metallicity, we analyze host-galaxy spectra to obtain gas-phase metallicities and star-formation rates from host galaxies with active star formation. From a final sample of ~ 40 emission-line galaxies, we find that light-curve corrected Type Ia supernovae are ~ 0.1 magnitudes brighter in high-metallicity hosts than in low-metallicity hosts. We also find a significant (> 3{\sigma}) correlation between the Hubble residuals of Type Ia supernovae and the specific star-formation rate of the host galaxy. We comment on the importance of supernova/host-galaxy correlations as a source of systematic bias in future deep supernova surveys.
Galactic cosmic rays are believed to be accelerated at supernova remnant shocks. Though very popular and robust, this conjecture still needs a conclusive proof. The strongest support to this idea is probably the fact that supernova remnants are observed in gamma-rays, which are indeed expected as the result of the hadronic interactions between the cosmic rays accelerated at the shock and the ambient gas. However, also leptonic processes can, in most cases, explain the observed gamma-ray emission. This implies that the detections in gamma rays do not necessarily mean that supernova remnants accelerate cosmic ray protons. To overcome this degeneracy, the multi-wavelength emission (from radio to gamma rays) from individual supernova remnants has been studied and in a few cases it has been possible to ascribe the gamma-ray emission to one of the two processes (hadronic or leptonic). Here we adopt a different approach and, instead of a case-by-case study we aim for a population study and we compute the number of supernova remnants which are expected to be seen in TeV gamma rays above a given flux under the assumption that these objects indeed are the sources of cosmic rays. The predictions found here match well with current observational results, thus providing a novel consistency check for the supernova remnant paradigm for the origin of galactic cosmic rays. Moreover, hints are presented for the fact that particle spectra significantly steeper than E^-2 are produced at supernova remnants. Finally, we expect that several of the supernova remnants detected by H.E.S.S. in the survey of the galactic plane should exhibit a gamma-ray emission dominated by hadronic processes (i.e. neutral pion decay). The fraction of the detected remnants for which the leptonic emission dominates over the hadronic one depends on the assumed values of the physical parameters and can be as high as roughly a half.
Over the last 15 years, the supernova community has endeavoured to identify progenitor stars of core-collapse supernovae in high resolution archival images of their galaxies.This review compiles results (from 1999 - 2013) in a distance limited sample and discusses the implications. The vast majority of the detections of progenitor stars are of type II-P, II-L or IIb with one type Ib progenitor system detected and many more upper limits for progenitors of Ibc supernovae (14). The data for these 45 supernovae progenitors illustrate a remarkable deficit of high luminosity stars above an apparent limit of Log L ~= 5.1 dex. For a typical Salpeter IMF, one would expect to have found 13 high luminosity and high mass progenitors. There is, possibly, only one object in this time and volume limited sample that is unambiguously high mass (the progenitor of SN2009ip). The possible biases due to the influence of circumstellar dust and sample selection methods are reviewed. It does not appear likely that these can explain the missing high mass progenitor stars. This review concludes that the observed populations of supernovae in the local Universe are not, on the whole, produced by high mass (M > ~18Msun) stars. Theoretical explosions of model stars also predict that black hole formation and failed supernovae tend to occur above M > ~18Msun. The models also suggest there are islands of explodability for stars in the 8-120Msun range. The observational constraints are quite consistent with the bulk of stars above M > ~18Msun collapsing to form black holes with no visible supernovae. (Abridged).
We present the SuperNova Explosion Code (SNEC), an open-source Lagrangian code for the hydrodynamics and equilibrium-diffusion radiation transport in the expanding envelopes of supernovae. Given a model of a progenitor star, an explosion energy, and an amount and distribution of radioactive nickel, SNEC generates the bolometric light curve, as well as the light curves in different broad bands assuming black body emission. As a first application of SNEC, we consider the explosions of a grid of 15 Msun (at zero-age main sequence) stars whose hydrogen envelopes are stripped to different extents and at different points in their evolution. The resulting light curves exhibit plateaus with durations of ~20-100 days if >~1.5-2 Msun of hydrogen-rich material is left and no plateau if less hydrogen-rich material is left. If these shorter plateau lengths are not seen for Type IIP supernovae in nature, it suggests that, at least for zero-age main sequence masses <~ 20 Msun, hydrogen mass loss occurs as an all or nothing process. This perhaps points to the important role binary interactions play in generating the observed mass-stripped supernovae (i.e., Type Ib/c events). These light curves are also unlike what is typically seen for Type IIL supernovae, arguing that simply varying the amount of mass loss cannot explain these events. The most stripped models begin to show double-peaked light curves similar to what is often seen for Type IIb supernovae, confirming previous work that these supernovae can come from progenitors that have a small amount of hydrogen and a radius of ~500 Rsun.
A new class of ultra-long duration (>10,000 s) gamma-ray bursts has recently been suggested. They may originate in the explosion of stars with much larger radii than normal long gamma-ray bursts or in the tidal disruptions of a star. No clear supernova had yet been associated with an ultra-long gamma-ray burst. Here we report that a supernova (2011kl) was associated with the ultra-long duration burst 111209A, at z=0.677. This supernova is more than 3 times more luminous than type Ic supernovae associated with long gamma-ray bursts, and its spectrum is distinctly different. The continuum slope resembles those of super-luminous supernovae, but extends farther down into the rest-frame ultra-violet implying a low metal content. The light curve evolves much more rapidly than super-luminous supernovae. The combination of high luminosity and low metal-line opacity cannot be reconciled with typical type Ic supernovae, but can be reproduced by a model where extra energy is injected by a strongly magnetized neutron star (a magnetar), which has also been proposed as the explanation for super-luminous supernovae.
Most massive stars, the progenitors of core-collapse supernovae, are in close binary systems and may interact with their companion through mass transfer or merging. We undertake a population synthesis study to compute the delay-time distribution of core-collapse supernovae, that is, the supernova rate versus time following a starburst, taking into account binary interactions. We test the systematic robustness of our results by running various simulations to account for the uncertainties in our standard assumptions. We find that a significant fraction, $15^{+9}_{-8}$%, of core-collapse supernovae are `late', that is, they occur 50-200 Myrs after birth, when all massive single stars have already exploded. These late events originate predominantly from binary systems with at least one, or, in most cases, with both stars initially being of intermediate mass ($4-8M_{\odot}$). The main evolutionary channels that contribute often involve either the merging of the initially more massive primary star with its companion or the engulfment of the remaining core of the primary by the expanding secondary that has accreted mass at an earlier evolutionary stage. Also, the total number of core-collapse supernovae increases by $14^{+15}_{-14}$% because of binarity for the same initial stellar mass. The high rate implies that we should have already observed such late core-collapse supernovae, but have not recognized them as such. We argue that $\phi$ Persei is a likely progenitor and that eccentric neutron star - white dwarf systems are likely descendants. Late events can help explain the discrepancy in the delay-time distributions derived from supernova remnants in the Magellanic Clouds and extragalactic type Ia events, lowering the contribution of prompt Ia events. We discuss ways to test these predictions and speculate on the implications for supernova feedback in simulations of galaxy evolution.
SN 2007bi and SN 1999as are among the first superluminous supernovae discovered. SN 2007bi was suggested to be powered by the radioactive decay of a large amount (5 - 10 Msun) of 56Ni. SN 1999as has a similar spectrum to SN 2007bi. One suggested way to synthesize such a large amount of 56Ni is through energetic core-collapse supernovae from very massive progenitors. Although the synthetic light curves of extremely energetic core-collapse supernovae have been shown to be consistent with SN 2007bi, no synthetic spectra have been reported. Here, we present synthetic spectra of extremely energetic core-collapse supernovae during the photospheric phases. We find that the ejecta density structure above 13,000 - 16,000 km/s needs to be cut in order to explain the co-existing broad and narrow line absorptions in SN 2007bi and SN 1999as. The density cut is likely caused by the interaction between the supernova ejecta and a dense circumstellar medium. Our results indicate that about 3 Msun of hydrogen-free dense circumstellar media might exist near the progenitors of SN 2007bi and SN 1999as. These massive circumstellar media would significantly affect the light-curve and spectral properties of the supernovae. The precursors that are sometimes observed in superluminous supernovae might be related to the collision of the ejecta with such dense circumstellar media. We also confirm results of previous studies that synthetic spectra from pair-instability supernova models do not match the early spectra of SN 2007bi and SN 1999as.
ULTIMATE-Subaru (Ultra-wide Laser Tomographic Imager and MOS with AO for Transcendent Exploration on Subaru) and WFIRST (Wide Field Infra-Red Survey Telescope) are the next generation near-infrared instruments that have a large field-of-view. They allow us to conduct deep and wide transient surveys in near-infrared. Such a near-infrared transient survey enables us to find very distant supernovae that are redshifted to the near-infrared wavelengths. We have performed the mock transient surveys with ULTIMATE-Subaru and WFIRST to investigate their ability to discover Population III pair-instability supernovae. We found that a 5-year 1 deg2 K-band transient survey with the point-source limiting magnitude of 26.5 mag with ULTIMATE-Subaru may find about 2 Population III pair-instability supernovae beyond the redshift of 6. A 5-year 10 deg2 survey with WFIRST reaching 26.5 mag in the F184 band may find about 7 Population III pair-instability supernovae beyond the redshift of 6. We also find that the expected numbers of the Population III pair-instability supernova detections increase about a factor of 2 if the near-infrared transient surveys are performed towards clusters of galaxies. Other supernovae such as Population II pair-instability supernovae would also be detected in the same survey. This study demonstrates that the future wide-field near-infrared instruments allow us to investigate the explosions of the first generation supernovae by performing the deep and wide near-infrared transient surveys.
We present DASH (Deep Automated Supernova and Host classifier), a novel software package that automates the classification of the type, age, redshift, and host galaxy of supernova spectra. DASH makes use of a new approach that does not rely on iterative template matching techniques like all previous software, but instead classifies based on the learned features of each supernova's type and age. It has achieved this by employing a deep convolutional neural network to train a matching algorithm. This approach has enabled DASH to be orders of magnitude faster than previous tools, being able to accurately classify hundreds or thousands of objects within seconds. We have tested its performance on four years of data from the Australian Dark Energy Survey (OzDES). The deep learning models were developed using TensorFlow, and were trained using over 4000 supernova spectra taken from the CfA Supernova Program and the Berkeley SN Ia Program as used in SNID (Supernova Identification software, Blondin & Tonry 2007). Unlike template matching methods, the trained models are independent of the number of spectra in the training data, which allows for DASH's unprecedented speed. We have developed both a graphical interface for easy visual classification and analysis of supernovae, and a Python library for the autonomous and quick classification of several supernova spectra. The speed, accuracy, user-friendliness, and versatility of DASH presents an advancement to existing spectral classification tools. We have made the code publicly available on GitHub and PyPI (pip install astrodash) to allow for further contributions and development. The package documentation is available at https://astrodash.readthedocs.io.
We propose that some of the unidentified Galactic plane (-10 degrees < b < 10 degrees) sources listed in the first EGRET catalog (Fichtel et al. 1994) are associated with nearby supernova remnants. The probability that the association of strong EGRET sources with supernova remnants is due to chance alignment is found to be < 1/2200. Three of the most convincing associations are radio-bright, nearby shell remnants and a fourth is associated with a plerion.   We examine possible gamma-ray production mechanisms and conclude that pion production and decay from high-energy protons interacting with the remnant gas could produce the gamma rays.   The energetics of this process are in accord with theories of cosmic ray production through supernova shock acceleration.   The identification of pion-decay features in the gamma-ray spectra of supernova remnants would support this interpretation.
Matter-enhanced antineutrino flavor transformation between $\bar\nu_e$ and $\bar\nu_{\mu(\tau)}$ can occur in supernovae if the vacuum masses for these species satisfy $m_{\bar\nu_e}>m_{\bar\nu_{\mu(\tau)}}$. For $\delta m^2> 1$ eV$^2$, such flavor transformation can affect the electron fraction $Y_e$ in the neutrino-heated supernova ejecta. We point out that such flavor transformation will not drive $Y_e>0.5$ at the $r$-process nucleosynthesis epoch in the best available supernova model for such nucleosynthesis. Consequently, there is no obvious conflict between matter-enhanced antineutrino flavor transformation $\bar\nu_e\rightleftharpoons\bar\nu_{\mu(\tau)}$ and $r$-process nucleosynthesis in the neutrino-heated supernova ejecta.
We explore the feasibility of resurrecting the apparent magnitude-redshift relation for a ``standard candle'' to measure the cosmological constant and mass density. We show that type Ia supernovae, if measured with 0.15 mag uncertainty out to a redshift of z=1, may provide a good standard candle or calibrated candle for this purpose. The recent discovery of probable type Ia supernovae in the redshift range z=0.3 to 0.5 (Perlmutter 1994a, and 1994b) indicates that the flux of optical photons from these events can be measured this accurately. The 7 distant supernovae discovered to date do not by themselves distinguish between different cosmological models, however the further discovery of about 50 type Ia supernovae at redshifts in the range $0.5 \leq z \leq 1.0 $ could strongly constrain the allowed range of these parameters. We estimate that the follow-up photometry necessary for this measurement would be on the order of 20 - 70 hours of time on a 10-meter class telescope at a site with good seeing.
Photometric measurements show that as a group nearby type Ia supernovae follow similar lightcurves and reach similar peak magnitudes Thus, these supernovae can serve as standard candles or calibrated candles at cosmological distances. Magnitudes of local and distant supernovae, both in the same filter band, are compared using a $K$ correction to account for the different spectral regions incident on that filter. A generalized approach compares magnitudes in different bands for the nearby and distant supernova, bands that are selected to give sensitivity in corresponding regions of the redshifted and unredshifted spectra. Thus at a redshift of $z \approx 0.5$, local $B$ magnitudes are compared with distant $R$ magnitudes. We compute these generalized $K$ corrections over a range of redshifts and bandpass pairs and discuss their advantages over the traditional single-band $K$ correction. In particular, errors near maximum light can be kept below 0.05 mag out to at least $z=0.6$, whereas the traditional $K$ correction is difficult to use beyond $z > 0.2$.
The conventional picture for the origin of the polarization of a supernova is based on a model of Thomson or resonance scattering of photons traveling through an aspherical supernova atmosphere. Positive detection of intrinsic polarization in SN 1987A is then interpretated as evidence of an asymmetrical supernova atmosphere. We show here a different view based on the scattering of the supernova light by a dusty circumstellar material (CSM), or the ``light echo'' effect. At a given epoch after the explosion, the observed photons consist of both those propagating directly from the supernova and those scattered by dust particles in the CSM. Polarized light can be produced if the distribution of the dust particles is aspherical. The model can reproduce both the time evolution of the observed broad band polarization of SN 1987A and major features of the polarization spectra. It is also successful in providing a natural model for the early infrared light curve, in particular the observed 30 day delay of the IR maximum compared to the maximum of the bolometric light curve.
The light curve of a distant Type Ia supernova acts like a clock that can be used to test the expansion of the Universe. SN~1995K, at a spectroscopic redshift of $z = 0.479$, provides one of the first meaningful data sets for this test. We find that all aspects of SN~1995K resemble local supernova Ia events when the light curve is dilated by $(1+z)$, as prescribed by cosmological expansion. In a static, non-expanding universe SN~1995K would represent a unique object with a spectrum identifying it as a regular Type Ia supernova but a light curve shape and luminosity which do not follow the well-established relations for local events. We conclude that SN~1995K provides strong evidence for an interpretation of cosmological redshifts as due to universal expansion. Theories in which photons dissipate their energy during travel are excluded as are age-redshift dependencies.
We examine the possibility that supernovae type Ia (SN Ia) are produced by white dwarfs accreting from Roche-lobe filling evolved companions, under the assumption that a strong optically thick stellar wind from accretor is able to stabilize the mass transfer. We show that if a mass transfer phase on a thermal timescale precedes a nuclear burning driven phase, then such systems (of which the supersoft X-ray sources are a subgroup) can account for about 10% of the inferred SN Ia rate.   In addition, we examine the cosmic history of the supernova rate, and we show that the ratio of the rate of SN Ia to the rate of supernovae produced by massive stars (supernovae of types II, Ib, Ic) should increase from about z = 1 towards lower redshifts.
We have carried out a sensitive search for young pulsars associated with supernova remnants using the 76-m Lovell radio telescope at Jodrell Bank. The observations were made at 606 MHz using a system with a bandwidth of 8 MHz and a set noise temperature on cold sky of about 50 K. The survey targeted 33 remnants in the northern hemisphere and achieved a nominal sensitivity of ~1 mJy in most cases. Two pulsars were discovered in the course of this survey and the known pulsar PSR B1952+29 was detected. The new pulsars, J0215+6218 and J1957+2831, were found during searches of the supernova remnants G132.7+1.3 and G65.1+0.6 respectively. Based on a statistical analysis of the present sample of proposed pulsar-supernova remnant pairs, we conclude that at most 17 associations are likely to be real. We find no strong evidence for a genuine association between either of the two newly discovered pulsars and their target supernova remnants.
We present a new strategy for measuring the electron neutrino mass ($\mnue$) by future detection of a Galactic supernova in large underground detectors such as the Super-Kamiokande (SK). This method is nearly model-independent and one can get a mass constraint in a straightforward way from experimental data without specifying any model parameters for profiles of supernova neutrinos. We have tested this method using virtual data generated from a numerical model of supernova neutrino emission by realistic Monte-Carlo simulations of the SK detection. It is shown that this method is sensitive to $\mnue$ of $\sim$ 3 eV for a Galactic supernova, and this range is as low as the prediction of the cold+hot dark matter scenario with a nearly degenerate mass hierarchy of neutrinos, which is consistent with the current observations of solar and atmospheric neutrino anomalies and density fluctuations in the universe.
We predict the rate at which Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB) afterglows should be detected in supernova searches as a function of limiting flux. Although GRB afterglows are rarer than supernovae, they are detectable at greater distances because of their higher intrinsic luminosity. Assuming that GRBs trace the cosmic star formation history and that every GRB gives rise to a bright afterglow, we find that the average detection rate of supernovae and afterglows should be comparable at limiting magnitudes brighter than K=18. The actual rate of afterglows is expected to be somewhat lower since only a fraction of all gamma-ray selected GRBs were observed to have associated afterglows. However, the rate could also be higher if the initial gamma-ray emission from GRB sources is more beamed than their late afterglow emission. Hence, current and future supernova searches can place strong constraints on the afterglow appearance fraction and the initial beaming angle of GRB sources.
Observations show that Type Ia Supernovae (SNe Ia) form a homogeneous class of objects. They share similar spectroscopic evolution, light-curve shapes, and peak absolute magnitudes. The slight departures from homogeneity that are observed can be used to produce a "calibrated candle" with corrected magnitudes with even smaller dispersion. The existence of this intrinsically bright distance indicator has inspired two coordinated high-redshift supernova searches: the Supernova Cosmology Project and the High-z Supernova Search Team. To date ~100 SNe Ia have been discovered by the two groups. The preliminary analysis of the first of these objects demonstrate how well SNe Ia can be used to measure the mass density of the universe Omega_M and the normalized cosmological constant Omega_Lambda = Lambda/3H_0^2.
A systematic survey of ions that could be responsible for features in the optical spectra of supernovae is carried out. Six different compositions that could be encountered in supernovae are considered. For each composition, the LTE optical depth of one of the strongest optical lines of each ion is plotted against temperature. For each ion that can realistically be considered as a candidate to produce identifiable features in supernova spectra, a sample synthetic spectrum is displayed. The optical depth plots and the synthetic spectra can provide guidance to studies of line identifications in the optical spectra of all types of supernovae during their photospheric phases.
The weak gravitational lensing of high redshift type Ia supernovae has the potential of probing the structure of matter on galaxy halo scales. This is complementary to the weak lensing of galaxies which probes structure of larger scales. There are already several organized searches for these supernovae being carried out for the purposes of cosmological parameter estimation. A method is proposed for extracting from future supernovae data information on lensing and the structures responsible. This method utilizes the correlations between SN luminosities and foreground galaxies. Simulations of the lensing and uncertainties will be presented. It is found that with a hundred supernovae or more at $z\simgt 1$ or larger, significant measurements of the mass, shape and extent of dark matter halos could be made if they contain a significant proportion of the matter in the universe.
In this paper we re-examine historical references to the supernova event of 1054 AD with a view to establishing a sequence astronomical events which minimizes apparent conflicts between the various sources. We find that the explosion of the supernova is likely to have occurred weeks to months before the commonly accepted date of July 4th 1054. This view is strongly supported by a number of European references to events visible in the evening sky during the spring which are likely to be associated with the appearance of the supernova. We find the best fit to the light curve based on Chinese observations and a maximum visible apparent magnitude for a supernova located at the distance to the Crab Nebula also confirms the earlier explosion date.
We have made a quantitative calculation for the systematic evolution of average extinction by interstellar dust in host galaxies of high-redshift Type Ia supernovae, by using a realistic model of photometric and chemical evolution of galaxies and supernova rate histories in various galaxy types. We find that average B band extinction <A_B> at z \sim 0.5 is typically 0.1-0.2 mag larger than present, under a natural assumption that dust optical depth is proportional to gas column density and gas metallicity. This systematic evolution causes average reddening with E(B-V) \sim 0.025-0.05 mag with the standard extinction curve, and this is comparable with the observational uncertainty of the reddening of high-redshift supernovae. Therefore, our result does not contradict the observations showing no significant reddening in high-z supernovae. However, the difference in apparent magnitude between an open universe and a \Lambda-dominated flat universe is only \sim 0.2 mag at z \sim 0.5, and hence this systematic evolution of extinction should be taken into account in a reliable measurement of cosmological parameters. Considering this uncertainty, we show that it is difficult to discriminate between an open and \Lambda-dominated flat cosmologies from the current data.
The energy deposition into the ejecta of type Ia supernovae is dominated at late times by the slowing of positrons produced in the $\beta^{+}$ decays of $^{56}$Co. Fits of model-generated light curves to observations of type Ia supernovae suggest that a significant number of positrons escape the ejecta and annihilate as a delayed emission. In this work, the isotopic yields of the $\beta^{+}$ decay unstable nuclei, $^{56}$Co, $^{44}$Ti & $^{26}$Al are combined with the delayed annihilation fractions of each isotope for types Ia, Ib, II supernovae to generate an estimate of the positron production rate due to supernovae. It is shown that SN produced positrons can explain a sizeable fraction of the galactic positron annihilation radiation, as measured at 511 keV by the CGRO/OSSE, SMM and TGRS instruments.
Type Ia supernovae (SNIa) have been used as approximate standard candles to measure cosmological parameters such as the Hubble constant and the deceleration parameter. These measurements rely on empirical correlations between peak luminosities and other features that can be observed in the supernovae spectra and their light curves. Such correlations deserve further study since they have been established from small samples of nearby SNIa. Two years ago, the EROS2 collaboration launched an automated search for supernovae with the 1m Marly telescope operating at La Silla. In all, 57 SNe have been discovered in this EROS2 search and spectra have been obtained for 26 of them. We found that 75% were of type Ia and 25% of type II. Using this sample, a preliminary SN explosion rate has been obtained. Our most recent observation campaign took place in February and March 99. It was performed in the framework of a large consortium led by the {\em Supernova Cosmology Project}. The aim of this intensive campaign was to provide an independent set of high quality light curves and spectra to study systematic effects in the measurement of cosmological parameters. We will briefly describe our search procedure and present the status of our ongoing analysis.
Study of radio supernovae (RSNe) over the past 20 years includes two dozen detected objects and more than 100 upper limits. From this work we are able to identify classes of radio properties, demonstrate conformance to and deviations from existing models, estimate the density and structure of the circumstellar material and, by inference, the evolution of the presupernova stellar wind, and reveal the last stages of stellar evolution before explosion. It is also possible to detect ionized hydrogen along the line of sight, to demonstrate binary properties of the stellar system, and to show clumpiness of the circumstellar material. More speculatively, it may be possible to provide distance estimates to radio supernovae.   The interesting and unusual radio supernova SN 1998bw, which is thought to be related to the gamma-ray burst GRB 980425, is discussed in particular detail. Its radio properties are compared and contrasted with those of other known RSNe.
Here we present some critical discussions about the systematic uncertainty by dust extinction in the recent cosmological results of high-redshift Type Ia supernovae. First we argue that the currently available data do not robustly exclude the cosmologically significant extinction either by the reddening check or the dispersion argument because of the observational uncertainties, even in the case of ordinary dust that reddens. Then we discuss two theoretical possibilities that high-z supernovae have larger extinction and hence they are fainter than local supernovae: the intergalactic dust and host galaxy evolution. Optical and near-infrared observations for a large number of supernovae with improved photometric accuracy are required to reject these possibilities and derive a compelling cosmological result.
In this paper, we present results from a simulation of stellar core collapse, bounce, and postbounce evolution with Boltzmann neutrino transport. We motivate the development of our Boltzmann solver in light of the sensitivity of the neutrino-heating core collapse supernova paradigm to details in the neutrino transport, particularly near the neutrinospheres, where the neutrinos are neither diffusing nor free streaming and a kinetic description is necessary, and in light of the mixed outcomes and transport approximations used in all prior supernova models in both one and two dimensions. We discuss the implications of our findings for the supernova mechanism and future supernova research. We also present the results of a Boltzmann transport prediction of the early neutrino light curves in the model included here.
The 10^51 ergs released in a supernova have far reaching consequences in the galaxy, determining elemental abundances, accelerating cosmic rays, and affecting the makeup of the interstellar medium. Recently the spectra of several supernova remnants have been found to be dominated by nonthermal emission. Separating the thermal and nonthermal components is important not only for the understanding of cosmic-ray acceleration and shock microphysics properties but for accurate assessment of the temperatures and line strengths. New models designed to model spatially resolved synchrotron X-rays from type Ia supernovae can contribute to the understanding of both the thermal physics (dynamics, abundances) and nonthermal physics (shock acceleration, magnetic-field amplification) of supernova remnants. I will describe model fits to SN 1006, emphasizing the physical constraints that can be placed on SNRs, abundances, and the cosmic-ray acceleration process.
A spherically symmetric model is presented for the interaction of a pulsar wind with the associated supernova remnant. This results in a pulsar wind nebula whose evolution is coupled to the evolution of the surrounding supernova remnant. This evolution can be divided in three stages. The first stage is characterised by a supersonic expansion of the pulsar wind nebula into the freely expanding ejecta of the progenitor star. In the next stage the pulsar wind nebula is not steady; the pulsar wind nebula oscillates between contraction and expansion due to interaction with the reverse shock of the supernova remnant: reverberations which propagate forward and backward in the remnant. After the reverberations of the reverse shock have almost completely vanished and the supernova remnant has relaxed to a Sedov solution, the expansion of the pulsar wind nebula proceeds subsonically. In this paper we present results from hydrodynamical simulations of a pulsar wind nebula through all these stages in its evolution. The simulations were carried out with the Versatile Advection Code.
The spatiotemporal coincidence of supernova (SN) 1998bw and gamma-ray burst (GRB) 980425 and this supernova's unusual optical and radio properties have prompted many theoretical models that produce GRBs from supernovae. We review the salient features of our simple, spherical model in which an energetic supernova explosion shock accelerates a small fraction of the progenitor's stellar envelope to mildly relativistic velocities. This material carries sufficient energy to produce a weak GRB and a bright radio supernova through an external shock against a dense stellar wind.
Supernova neutrinos could be well-suited for probing neutrino decay, since decay may be observed even for very small decay rates or coupling constants. We will introduce an effective operator framework for the combined description of neutrino decay and neutrino oscillations for supernova neutrinos, which can especially take into account two properties: One is the radially symmetric neutrino flux, allowing a decay product to be re-directed towards the observer even if the parent neutrino had a different original direction of propagation. The other is decoherence because of the long baselines for coherently produced neutrinos. We will demonstrate how to use this effective theory to calculate the time-dependent fluxes at the detector. In addition, we will show the implications of a Majoron-like decay model. As a result, we will demonstrate that for certain parameter values one may observe some effects which could also mimic signals similar to the ones expected from supernova models, making it in general harder to separate neutrino and supernova properties.
We present BVRI photometry of the Type Ia supernovae 1999da, 1999dk, 1999gp, 2000bk, and 2000ce, plus infrared photometry of three of these. These objects exhibit the full range of decline rates of Type Ia supernovae. Combined optical and infrared data show that families of V - infrared color curves can be used to derive the host extinction (A_V) of these objects. Existing data do not yet allow us to construct these loci for all color indices and supernova decline rates, but the V-K color evolution is sufficiently uniform that it allows the determination of host extinction over a wide range of supernova decline rates to an accuracy of roughly +/- 0.1 mag. We introduce a new empirical parameter, the mean I-band flux 20 to 40 days after maximum light, and show how it is directly related to the decline rate.
We have used MERLIN, at 1.4 and 5 GHz, to search for radio supernovae (RSNe) and supernova remnants (SNRs) in the unobscured irregular dwarf galaxy NGC1569, and in particular in the region of its super star clusters (SSCs) A and B. Throughout NGC1569 we find some 5 RSNe and SNRs but the SSCs and their immediate surroundings are largely devoid of non-thermal radio sources. Even though many massive stars in the SSCs are expected to have exploded already, when compared with M82 and its many SSCs the absence of RSNe and SNRs in and near A and B may seem plausible on statistical arguments. The absence of RSNe and SNRs in and near A and B may, however, also be due to a violent and turbulent outflow of stellar winds and supernova ejected material, which does not provide a quiescent environment for the development of SNRs within and near the SSCs.
We present some arguments in support of the association of the pulsar PSR B1706-44 with the supernova remnant G343.1-2.3, based on the idea that these objects could be the result of a supernova explosion within a mushroom-like cavity (created by the supernova progenitor wind breaking out of the parent molecular cloud). We suggest that in addition to the known bright "half" of G343.1-2.3 there should exist a more extended and weaker component, such that the actual shape of G343.1-2.3 is similar to that of the well-known SNR VRO 42.05.01. We have found such a component in archival radio data.
The masses and the evolutionary states of the progenitors of core-collapse supernovae are not well constrained by direct observations. Stellar evolution theory generally predicts that massive stars with initial masses less than about 30M_sol should undergo core-collapse when they are cool M-type supergiants. However the only two detections of a SN progenitor before explosion are SN1987A and SN1993J, and neither of these was an M-type supergiant. Attempting to identify the progenitors of supernovae is a difficult task, as precisely predicting the time of explosion of a massive star is impossible for obvious reasons. There are several different types of supernovae which have different spectral and photometric evolution, and how exactly these are related to the evolutionary states of the progenitor stars is not currently known. I will describe a novel project which may allow the direct identification of core-collapse supernovae progenitors on pre-explosion images of resolved, nearby galaxies. This project is now possible with the excellent image archives maintained by several facilities and will be enhanced by the new initiatives to create Virtual Observatories, the earliest of which ASTROVIRTEL is already producing results.
Hydrodynamical simulations are presented of a pulsar wind emitted by a supersonically moving pulsar. The pulsar moves through the interstellar medium or, in the more interesting case, through the supernova remnant created at its birth event. In both cases there exists a three-fold structure consisting of the wind termination shock, contact discontinuity and a bow shock bounding the pulsar wind nebula. Using hydrodynamical simulations we study the behaviour of the pulsar wind nebula inside a supernova remnant, and in particular the interaction with the outer shell of swept up interstellar matter and the blast wave surrounding the remnant. This interaction occurs when the pulsar breaks out of the supernova remnant. We assume the remnant is in the Sedov stage of its evolution. Just before break-through, the Mach number associated with the pulsar motion equals ${\cal M}_{\rm psr} = 7/\sqrt{5}$, {\em independent} of the supernova explosion energy and pulsar velocity. The bow shock structure is shown to survive this break-through event.
Weak lensing of high-redshift Type Ia supernovae induces an external dispersion in their observed standard candle brightnesses, comparable in magnitude to the intrinsic dispersion for redshifts z>1. The same matter fluctuations responsible for the magnification of distant supernovae also generate shear in the images of background galaxies. We investigate the possibility of using lensing shear maps constructed from galaxies surrounding the supernovae as a means of correcting the lensing-induced magnification dispersion. We find that a considerable fraction of the lensing dispersion derives from sub-arcminute scales, which are not probed by shear maps smoothed on arcminute scales. We thus find that weak lensing shear maps will be of only limited value in reducing the weak lensing magnification fluctuations of supernovae.
We investigate the possibility of measuring the Hubble constant, the fractional energy density components and the equation of state parameter of the ``dark energy'' using lensed multiple images of high-redshift supernovae. With future instruments, such as the SNAP and NGST satellites, it will become possible to observe several hundred lensed core-collapse supernovae with multiple images. Accurate measurements of the image separation, flux-ratio, time-delay and lensing foreground galaxy will provide complementary information to the cosmological tests based on, e.g., the magnitude-redshift relation of Type Ia supernovae, especially with regards to the Hubble parameter that could be measured with a statistical uncertainty at the one percent level. Assuming a flat universe, the statistical uncertainty on the mass density is found to be sigma^stat_m <0.05. However, systematic effects from the uncertainty of the lens modeling are likely to dominate. E.g., if the lensing galaxies are extremely compact but are (erroneously) modeled as singular isothermal spheres, the mass density is biased by sigma^syst_m =0.1.   We argue that wide-field near-IR instruments such as the one proposed for the SNAP mission are critical for collecting large statistics of lensed supernovae.
We present the first results from an ongoing work aimed to use supernovae remnants to discriminate among different type Ia supernovae explosion models. We have computed the hydrodynamic interaction of supernova ejecta with the interstellar medium, obtaining the evolution of the density, temperature and ionization structure of the remnant. We have used ejecta profiles obtained from 1D hydrodynamic calculations of the different explosion mechanisms that are currently under debate. We have analyzed the best indicators that allow to discriminate among the different explosion mechanisms, taking into account the diversity of scenarios proposed for the presupernova evolution of the binary system, and the uncertain amount of electron heating in collisionless shocks.
On the 13th of May 2002, supernova 2002cv was discovered using a near-infrared camera working at the AZT-24 1.1m telescope at Campo Imperatore (AQ-Italy). After the infrared detection a simultaneous photometric follow-up was started at optical wavelengths. The preliminary results confirm a heavily obscured object with a V-K color not lower than 6 magnitudes, making SN 2002cv the most reddened supernova ever observed. This finding, along with the recent discovery of another obscured supernova, suggests a critical revision of the rates known to date. The estimate of the visual extinction and the light curves are provided here. These latter indicate that our SN 2002cv observations are the earliest available for a type-Ia supernova at IR wavelengths.
We discuss observational constrains coming from supernovae Ia \cite{Perlmutter99} imposed on the behaviour of the Randall-Sundrum models. In the case of dust matter on the brane, the difference between the best-fit general relativistic model with a $\Lambda$-term \cite{Perlmutter99} and the best-fit brane models becomes detectable for redshifts $z > 0.6$. It is interesting that brane models predict brighter galaxies for such redshifts which is in agreement with the measurement of the $z = 1.7$ supernova \cite{Riess01} and with the New Data from the High Z Supernovae Search Team \cite{schmit02}. We also demonstrate that the fit to supernovae data can also be obtained, if we admit the "super-negative" dark energy $p = - (4/3) \varrho$ on the brane, where the dark energy in a way mimics the influence of the cosmological constant. It also appears that the dark energy enlarges the age of the universe which is demanded in cosmology. Finally, we propose to check for dark radiation and brane tension by the application of the angular diameter of galaxies minimum value test.
A number of supernovae, classified as Type II, show remarkably peculiar properties such as an extremely low expansion velocity and an extraordinarily small amount of $^{56}$Ni in the ejecta. We present a joint analysis of the available observations for two of these peculiar Type II supernovae, SN 1997D and SN 1999br, using a comprehensive semi-analytic method that can reproduce the light curve and the evolution of the line velocity and continuum temperature. We find that these events are under-energetic with respect to a typical Type II supernova and that the inferred mass of the ejecta is relatively large. We discuss the possibility that these supernovae originate from the explosion of a massive progenitor in which the rate of early infall of stellar material on the collapsed core is large. Events of this type could form a black hole remnant, giving rise to significant fallback and late-time accretion.
We investigate the potential of using massive clusters as gravitational telescopes for searches and studies of supernovae of Type Ia and Type II in optical and near-infrared bands at central wavelengths in the interval 0.8-1.25 microns. Using high-redshift supernova rates derived from the measured star formation rate, we find the most interesting effects for the detection of core-collapse SNe in searches at limiting magnitudes m_lim~25-26.5 mag, where the total detection rate could be significantly enhanced and the number of detectable events is considerable even in a small field. For shallower searches, ~24, a net gain factor of up to 3 in the discovery rate could be obtained, and yet a much larger factor for very high source redshifts. For programs such as the GOODS/ACS transient survey, the discovery rate of supernovae beyond z~2 could be significantly increased if the observations were done in the direction of massive clusters. For extremely deep observations, m_lim > 27 mag, or for very bright SNe (e.g. Type Ia) the competing effect of field reduction by lensing dominates, and fewer supernovae are likely to be discovered behind foreground clusters.
The high energy neutrino signature from proton-proton and photo-meson interactions in a supernova remnant shell ejected prior to a gamma-ray burst provides a test for the precursor supernova, or supranova, model of gamma-ray bursts. Protons in the supernova remnant shell, and photons entrapped from a supernova explosion or a pulsar wind from a fast-rotating neutron star remnant provide ample targets for protons escaping the internal shocks of the gamma-ray burst to interact and produce high energy neutrinos. We calculate the expected neutrino fluxes, which can be detected by current and future experiments.
This paper summarizes observed and physical properties of all types of core collapse supernovae. Despite the great diversity displayed by these objects, several regularities emerge which suggest that 1) there is a continuum in the properties of these objects, 2) the mass of the envelope is one of the driving parameters of the explosion, or it is correlated with some other property of the core, with the latter determining the outcome of the explosion, and 3) the physics of the core and explosion mechanism of all core collapse supernovae are not be fundamentally different, regardless of the external appearance of the supernova. Far above in energy scale and 56Ni production lies SN 1998bw, the only supernova firmly associated with a gamma-ray burst.
The instability in the cosmic-ray precursor of a supernova shock moving in interstellar medium is studied. The level of magnetohydrodynamic turbulence in this region determines the maximum energy of particles accelerated by the diffusive shock acceleration mechanism. The high efficiency of cosmic ray acceleration is accepted, and the consideration is not limited by the case of weak turbulence. It is assumed that Kolmogorov type nonlinear wave interactions together with the ion-neutral collisions restrict the amplitude of random magnetic field. As a result, the maximum energy of accelerated particles strongly depends on the age of supernova remnant. The maximum energy can be as high as $\sim10^{17}Z$ eV in young supernova remnants and falls down to about $\sim10^{10}Z$ eV at the end of Sedov stage. Thus the standard estimate of maximum particle energy based on the Bohm limit calculated for the interstellar magnetic field strength is not justified in this case. This finding may explain why the supernova remnants with the age more than a few thousand years are not prominent sources of very high energy gamma-rays.
Development of large mass detectors for low-energy neutrinos and dark matter may allow supernova detection via neutrino-nucleus elastic scattering. An elastic-scattering detector could observe a few, or more, events per ton for a galactic supernova at 10 kpc ($3.1 \times 10^{20}$ m). This large yield, a factor of at least 20 greater than that for existing light-water detectors, arises because of the very large coherent cross section and the sensitivity to all flavors of neutrinos and antineutrinos. An elastic scattering detector can provide important information on the flux and spectrum of $\nu_\mu$ and $\nu_\tau$ from supernovae. We consider many detectors and a range of target materials from $^4$He to $^{208}$Pb. Monte Carlo simulations of low-energy backgrounds are presented for the liquid-neon-based Cryogenic Low Energy Astrophysics with Noble gases (CLEAN) detector. The simulated background is much smaller than the expected signal from a galactic supernova.
Supernova rates (hypernova, type II, type Ib/c and type Ia) in a particular galaxy depend on the metallicity (i.e. on the galaxy age), on the physics of star formation and on the binary population. In order to study the time evolution of the galactic supernova rates, we use our chemical evolutionary model that accounts in detail for the evolution of single stars and binaries. In particular, supernovae of type Ia are considered to arise from exploding white dwarfs in interacting binaries and we adopt the two most plausible physical models: the single degenerate model and the double degenerate model. Comparison between theoretical prediction and observations of supernova rates in different types of galaxies allows to put constraints on the population of intermediate mass and massive close binaries. The temporal evolution of the absolute galactic rates of different types of SNe (including the SN Ia rate) is presented in such a way that the results can be directly implemented into a galactic chemical evolutionary model. Particularly for SNIa the inclusion of binary evolution leads to results considerably different from those in earlier population synthesis approaches, in which binary evolution was not included in detail.
The environments of supernova explosion are often inhomogeneous and there may be jumps in their density structure. We have developed a semi-analytic model under the thin-shell approximation for supernova remnants that evolve crossing a density jump in the ambient medium. The generic evolutionary relations are presented for the blast wave after impacting on a cavity wall, which may be produced by the energetic stellar wind from the supernova progenitor. The relations can also be extended to the case that the blast waves break out from a dense cloud if different density contrast is used. This model is applied to N132D, a well-known cavity-born supernova remnant whose evolution has not yet been quantitively estimated in a cavity scenario due to lack of model formulae, and self-consistent physical parameters are obtained.
We model the interaction of the supernova SN 1995G with a dense circumstellar (CS) gas in a thin shell approximation. A model fit of the observed bolometric light curve combined with data on the supernova expansion velocity provides an estimate of the density of the CS shell, its mass ($\approx 1 M_{\odot}$), and age ($\approx 8$ years). It is shown that the derived CS gas density does not depend on the assumed mass of the supernova ejecta. This results from the high CS density, which ensures that the forward shock wave is essentially radiative. The derived CS density is consistent with the H$\alpha$ luminosity and with the presence of the apparent effect of Thomson scattering in the red wing of this line. The mass of the CS envelope together with its expansion velocity indicates that the CS envelope was ejected as a result of violent energy release ($\sim 6\times10^{48}$ erg) eight years before the supernova outburst.
We calculate the TeV-PeV neutrino fluxes of gamma-ray bursts associated with supernovae, based on the observed association between GRB 030329 and supernova SN 2003dh. The neutrino spectral flux distributions can test for possible delays between the supernova and the gamma-ray burst events down to much shorter timescales than what can be resolved with photons. As an illustrative example, we calculate the probability of neutrino induced muon and electron cascade events in a km scale under-ice detector at the South Pole, from the GRB 030329. Our calculations demonstrate that km scale neutrino telescopes are expected to detect signals that will allow to constrain supernova-GRB models.
We present extensive radio observations of SN 2003L, the most luminous and energetic Type Ic radio supernova with the exception of SN 1998bw. Using radio data, we are able to constrain the physical parameters of the supernova, including the velocity and energy of the fastest ejecta, the temporal evolution of the magnetic field, and the density profile of the surrounding medium. We highlight the extraordinary properties of the radio emission with respect to the supernova's normal characteristics within optical bands. We find that although the explosion does not show evidence for a significant amount of relativistic ejecta, it produces a radio luminosity which is comparable to that seen in the unusual SN 1998bw. Using SN 2003L as an example, we comment briefly on the broad diversity of type Ic properties and the associated implications for progenitor models.
We present the results of a novel new search of the first data-release from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS-DR1) for the spectra of supernovae. The use of large spectroscopic galaxy surveys offers the prospect of obtaining improved estimates of the local supernova rate, with the added benefit of a very different selection function to that of conventional photometric surveys. In this Letter we present an overview of our search methodology and the details of 19 Type Ia supernovae found in SDSS--DR1. The supernovae sample is used to make a preliminary estimate, Gamma_Ia = 0.4 +/- 0.2 h^2 SNu, of the cosmological SNe rate.
Several stars at the low-metallicity extreme of the Galactic halo ([Fe/H]=-2.5) show strong enhancements of both s-process and r-process elements. The presence of s-process elements in main-sequence stars is explained via mass transfer from an AGB companion star in a binary system. r-Process elements originate in type-II supernovae and also require mass transfer. It is however unclear how pollution by both an AGB star and a supernova could have occured. Here I show that the initial--final-mass relation steepens at low metallicity, due to low mass-loss efficiency. This may cause the degenerate cores of low-Z, high-mass AGB stars to reach the Chandresekhar mass, leading to an Iben & Renzini-type-1.5 supernova. Such supernovae can explain both the enhancement patterns and the metallicity dependence of the double-enhanced halo stars. Reduced mass loss efficiency predicts more massive remnants in metal-poor globular clusters. The evidence for a high M/L population in the cores of globular clusters is briefly discussed.
This is the text of an introduction to a workshop on asymmetric explosions held in Austin in June, 2003. The great progress in supernova research over thirty-odd years is briefly reviewed. The context in which the meeting was called is then summarized. The theoretical success of the intrinsically multidimensional delayed detonation paradigm in explaining the nature of Type Ia supernovae coupled with new techniques of observations in the near IR and with spectropolarimetry promise great advances in understanding binary progenitors, the explosion physics, and the ever more accurate application to cosmology. Spectropolarimetry has also revealed the strongly asymmetric nature of core collapse and given valuable perspectives on the supernova - gamma-ray burst connection. The capability of the magneto-rotational instability to rapidly create strong toroidal magnetic fields in the core collapse ambiance is outlined. This physics may be the precursor to driving MHD jets that play a role in asymmetric supernovae. Welcome to the brave new world of three-dimensional explosions!
The measurements of the absolute magnitudes and redshifts of supernovas Ia show that conventional physics, which includes plasma redshift, fully explains the observed magnitude-redshift relation of the supernovas. The only parameter that is required is the Hubble constant, which in principle can be measured independently. The contemporary theory of the expansion of the universe (Big Bang) requires in addition to the Hubble constant several adjustable parameters, such as an initial explosion, the dark matter parameter, and a time adjustable dark energy parameter for explaining the supernova Ia data. The contemporary Big Bang theory also requires time dilation of distant events as an inherent premise. The contention is usually that the light curves of distant supernovas show or even prove the time dilation. In the present article, we challenge this assertion. We document and show that the previously reported data in fact indicate that there is no time dilation. The data reported by Riess et al. in the Astrophysical Journal in June 2004 confirm the plasma redshift, the absence of time dilation, dark matter, and dark energy.
The Hubble's constant is usually surmised to be a constant; but the experiments show a large spread and conflicting estimates. According to the plasma-redshift theory, the Hubble's constant varies with the plasma densities along the line of sight. It varies then slightly with the direction and the distance to a supernova and a galaxy. The relation between the magnitudes of type Ia supernovae and their observed redshifts results in an Hubble's constant with an average value in intergalactic space of 59.44 km per s per Mpc. The standard deviation from this average value is only 0.6 km per s per Mpc, but the standard deviation in a single measurement is about 8.2 km per s per Mpc. These deviations do not include possible absolute calibration errors. The experiments show that the Hubble's constant varies with the intrinsic redshifts of the Milky Way galaxy and the host galaxies for type Ia supernovae, and that it varies with the galactic latitude. These findings support the plasma-redshift theory and contradict the contemporary big-bang theory. Together with the previously reported absence of time dilation in type Ia supernovae measurements, these findings have profound consequences for the standard cosmological theory.
Interstellar dust plays a crucial role in the evolution of the Universe by assisting the formation of molecules, by triggering the formation of the first low-mass stars, and by absorbing stellar ultraviolet-optical light and subsequently re-emitting it at infrared/millimetre wavelengths. Dust is thought to be produced predominantly in the envelopes of evolved (age >1 Gyr), low-mass stars. This picture has, however, recently been brought into question by the discovery of large masses of dust in the host galaxies of quasars at redshift z>6, when the age of the Universe was less than 1 Gyr. Theoretical studies, corroborated by observations of nearby supernova remnants, have suggested that supernovae provide a fast and efficient dust formation environment in the early Universe. Here we report infrared observations of a quasar at redshift 6.2, which are used to obtain directly its dust extinction curve. We then show that such a curve is in excellent agreement with supernova dust models. This result demonstrates a supernova origin for dust in this high-redshift quasar, from which we infer that most of the dust at high redshifts has probably the same origin.
This paper presents archival ROSAT PSPC observations of the G65.2+5.7 supernova remnant (also known as G65.3+5.7). Little material obscures this remnant and so it was well observed, even at the softest end of ROSAT's bandpass (~0.11 to 0.28 keV). These soft X-ray images reveal the remnant's centrally-filled morphology which, in combination with existing radio frequency observations, places G65.2+5.7 in the thermal composite (mixed morphology) class of supernova remnants. Not only might G65.2+5.7 be the oldest known thermal composite supernova remnant, but owing to its optically revealed cool, dense shell, this remnant supports the proposal that thermal composite supernova remnants lack X-ray bright shells because they have evolved beyond the adiabatic phase. These observations also reveal a slightly extended point source centered on RA = 19h 36m 46s, dec = 30deg 40' 07'' and extending 6.5 arcmin in radius in the band 67 map. The source of this emission has yet to be discovered, as there is no known pulsar at this location.
The evolution of a gas shell, swept by the supernova remnant of a massive first generation star, is studied with H_2 and HD chemistry taken into account. When a first-generation star explodes as a supernova, H_2 and HD molecules are formed in the swept gas shell and effectively cool the gas shell to temperatures of 32 K - 154 K. If the supernova remnant can sweep to gather the ambient gas, the gas shell comes to be dominated by its self-gravity, and hence, is expected to fragment. Our result shows that for a reasonable range of temperatures (200 K - 1000 K) of interstellar gas, the formation of second-generation stars can be triggered by a single supernova or hypernova.
We address a new set of models for the spectral analysis of the X-ray emission from young, ejecta-dominated Type Ia supernova remnants. These models are based on hydrodynamic simulations of the interaction between Type Ia supernova explosion models and the surrounding ambient medium, coupled to self-consistent ionization and electron heating calculations in the shocked supernova ejecta, and the generation of synthetic spectra with an appropriate spectral code. The details are provided elsewhere, but in this paper we concentrate on a specific class of Type Ia explosion models (delayed detonations), commenting on the differences that arise between their synthetic X-ray spectra under a variety of conditions.
We consider some of the spectral and polarimetric signatures of the gravitational confined detonation scenario for Type Ia supernova explosions. In this model, material produced by an off-center deflagration (which itself fails to produce the explosion) forms a metal-rich atmosphere above the white dwarf surface. Using hydrodynamical simulations, we show that this atmosphere is compressed and accelerated during the subsequent interaction with the supernova ejecta. This leads ultimately to the formation of a high-velocity pancake of metal-rich material that is geometrically detached from the bulk of the ejecta. When observed at the epochs near maximum light, this absorbing pancake produces a highly blueshifted and polarized calcium IR triplet absorption feature similar to that observed in several Type~Ia supernovae. We discuss the orientation effects present in our model and contrast them to those expected in other supernova explosion models. We propose that a large sample of spectropolarimetric observations can be used to critically evaluate the different theoretical scenarios.
A principal `supernova neutrino challenge' is the computational difficulty of six-dimensional neutrino radiation hydrodynamics. The variety of resulting approximations has provoked a long history of uncertainty in the core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism, but recent work highlighting low-mode convection and a newly-recognized instability in spherical accretion shocks may signal (yet another) resolution. As part of its goal of elucidating the explosion mechanism, the Terascale Supernova Initiative is committed to meeting the full complexity of the computational challenge. The understanding of supernova neutrino emission gained in detailed simulations provides a potential basis for learning about two major remaining unknowns in neutrino flavor mixing: the value of the mixing angle $\theta_{13}$, and distinguishing between ``normal'' and ``inverted'' mass hierarchies.
Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are rare but powerful explosions displaying highly relativistic jets. It has been suggested that a significant fraction of the much more frequent core-collapse supernovae are accompanied by comparably energetic but mildly relativistic jets, which would indicate an underlying supernova--GRB connection. We calculate the neutrino spectra from the decays of pions and kaons produced in jets in supernovae, and show that the kaon contribution is dominant and provides a sharp break near 20 TeV, which is a sensitive probe of the conditions inside the jet. For a supernova at 10 Mpc, 30 events above 100 GeV are expected in a 10 s burst in the IceCube detector.
We report on the discovery of X-ray emission from SN 1970G in M101, 35 years after its outburst, using deep X-ray imaging with the Chandra X-ray observatory. The Chandra ACIS spectrum shows that the emission is soft (<2 keV) and characteristic for the reverse shock region. The X-ray luminosity (1 x 10^37 ergs/s) is likely caused by the interaction of the supernova (SN) shock with dense circumstellar matter. If the material was deposited by the stellar wind from the progenitor, a mass-loss rate of (2.6+/-0.4) x 10^-5 M_sun/year is inferred. Utilizing the high-resolution Chandra ACIS data of SN 1970G and its environment, we reconstruct the X-ray lightcurve from previous ROSAT HRI, PSPC, and XMM-Newton EPIC observations, and find a best-fit linear rate of decline of L \propto t^-s with index s = 1.7+/-0.6 over a period of 12-35 years after the outburst. As the oldest SN detected in X-rays, SN 1970G allows, for the first time, direct observation of the transition from a SN to its supernova remnant (SNR) phase.
It has been hypothesized recently that core collapse supernovae are triggered by mildly relativistic jets following observations of radio properties of these explosions. Association of a jet, similar to a gamma-ray burst jet but only slower, allows shock acceleration of particles to high energy and non-thermal neutrino emission from a supernova. Detection of these high energy neutrinos in upcoming kilometer scale Cherenkov detectors may be the only direct way to probe inside these astrophysical phenomena as electromagnetic radiation is thermal and contains little information. Calculation of high energy neutrino signal from a simple and slow jet model buried inside the pre-supernova star is reviewed here. The detection prospect of these neutrinos in water or ice detector is also discussed in this brief review. Jetted core collapse supernovae in nearby galaxies may provide the strongest high energy neutrino signal from point sources.
The computational difficulty of six-dimensional neutrino radiation hydrodynamics has spawned a variety of approximations, provoking a long history of uncertainty in the core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism. Under the auspices of the Terascale Supernova Initiative, we are honoring the physical complexity of supernovae by meeting the computational challenge head-on, undertaking the development of a new adaptive mesh refinement code for self-gravitating, six-dimensional neutrino radiation magnetohydrodynamics. This code--called {\em GenASiS}, for {\em Gen}eral {\em A}strophysical {\em Si}mulation {\em S}ystem--is designed for modularity and extensibility of the physics. Presently in use or under development are capabilities for Newtonian self-gravity, Newtonian and special relativistic magnetohydrodynamics (with `realistic' equation of state), and special relativistic energy- and angle-dependent neutrino transport--including full treatment of the energy and angle dependence of scattering and pair interactions.
We show that neutrino-driven pulsar kicks can increase the energy of the supernova shock. The observed large velocities of pulsars are believed to originate in the supernova explosion, either from asymmetries in the ejecta or from an anisotropic emission of neutrinos (or other light particles) from the cooling neutron star. In this paper we assume the velocities are caused by anisotropic neutrino emission and study the effects of these neutrino-driven kicks on the supernova explosion. We find that if the collapsed star is marginally unable to produce an explosion, the neutrino-driven mechanisms can drive the convection to make a successful explosion. The resultant explosion is asymmetric, with the strongest ejecta motion roughly in the direction of the neutron star kick. This is in sharp contrast with the ejecta-driven mechanisms, which predict the motion of the ejecta in the opposite direction. This difference can be used to distinguish between the two mechanisms based on the observations of the supernova remnants.
The launch of Chandra and XMM-Newton has led to important new findings concerning the X-ray emission from supernova remnants. These findings are a result of the high spatial resolution with which imaging spectroscopy is now possible, but also some useful results have come out of the grating spectrometers of both X-ray observatories, despite the extended nature of supernova remnants. The findings discussed here are the evidence for slow equilibration of electron and ion temperatures near fast supernova remnant shocks, the magnetic field amplification near remnant shocks due to cosmic ray acceleration, a result that has come out of studying narrow filaments of X-ray synchrotron emission, and finally the recent findings concerning Fe-rich ejecta in Type Ia remnants and the presence of a jet/counter jet system in the Type Ib supernova remnant Cas A.
We study the effect of the stochastic character of supernova explosions on the anisotropy of galactic cosmic rays below the knee. We conclude that if the bulk of cosmic rays are produced in supernova explosions the observed small and nearly energy independent amplitude of the anisotropy and its phase are to the large extent determined by the history of these explosions in the vicinity of the solar system, namely by the location and the age of the supernova remnants, within a few kpc, which give the highest contribution to the total intensity at the present epoch. Among the most important factors which result in the small magnitude and the energy independence of the anisotropy amplitude are the mixed primary mass composition, the effect of the Single Source and the Galactic Halo. Special attention is given to the phase of the anisotropy. It is shown that the excessive flux from the Outer Galaxy can be due to the location of the solar system at the inner edge of the Orion Arm which has the enhanced density and rate of supernova explosions.
The abundance patterns of extremely metal-poor (EMP) stars provide us with important information on nucleosynthesis in supernovae (SNe) formed in a Pop III or EMP environment, and thus on the nature of the first stars in the Universe. We review nucleosynthesis yields of various types of those SNe, focusing on core-collapse (black-hole-forming) SNe with various progenitor masses, explosion energies (including Hypernovae), and asphericity. We discuss the implications of the observed trends in the abundance ratios among iron-peak elements, and the large C/Fe ratio observed in certain EMP stars with particular attention to recently discovered hyper metal-poor (HMP) stars. We show that the abundance pattern of the HMP stars with [Fe/H] < -5 and other EMP stars are in good accord with those of black-hole-forming supernovae, but not pair-instability supernovae. This suggests that black-hole-forming supernovae made important contributions to the early Galactic (and cosmic) chemical evolution. Finally we discuss the nature of First (Pop III) Stars.
The supernova SN 2006aj associated with GRB 060218 is the second-closest GRB-SN observed to date (z=0.033). We present Very Large Telescope, Liverpool Telescope, and Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope multi-color photometry of SN 2006aj. This supernova is found to be subluminous and rapidly evolving. Its early light curve includes an additional wavelength-dependent component, which can be interpreted as shock break-out. We compare the photometric evolution of multi-band light curves with the corresponding properties of the present sample of more than 10 GRB-SNe with precisely known redshifts. Using host-galaxy extinction measurements, we derive extinction-corrected GRB-SN luminosities and place SN 2006aj in the context of this GRB-selected supernova sample as well as in the context of local stripped-envelope supernovae.
We present a new theory for the gravitational wave signatures of core-collapse supernovae. Previous studies identified axisymmetric rotating core collapse, core bounce, postbounce convection, and anisotropic neutrino emission as the primary processes and phases for the radiation of gravitational waves. Our results, which are based on axisymmetric, Newtonian radiation-hydrodynamics supernova simulations (Burrows et al. 2006), indicate that the dominant emission process of gravitational waves in core-collapse supernovae may be the oscillations of the protoneutron star core. The oscillations are predominantly of g-mode character, are excited hundreds of milliseconds after bounce, and typically last for several hundred milliseconds. Our results suggest that even nonrotating core-collapse supernovae should be visible to current LIGO-class detectors throughout the Galaxy, and depending on progenitor structure, possibly out to Megaparsec distances.
We discuss Monte-Carlo techniques for addressing the 3-dimensional time-dependent radiative transfer problem in rapidly expanding supernova atmospheres. The transfer code SEDONA has been developed to calculate the lightcurves, spectra, and polarization of aspherical supernova models. From the onset of free-expansion in the supernova ejecta, SEDONA solves the radiative transfer problem self-consistently, including a detailed treatment of gamma-ray transfer from radioactive decay and with a radiative equilibrium solution of the temperature structure. Line fluorescence processes can also be treated directly. No free parameters need be adjusted in the radiative transfer calculation, providing a direct link between multi-dimensional hydrodynamical explosion models and observations. We describe the computational techniques applied in SEDONA, and verify the code by comparison to existing calculations. We find that convergence of the Monte Carlo method is rapid and stable even for complicated multi-dimensional configurations. We also investigate the accuracy of a few commonly applied approximations in supernova transfer, namely the stationarity approximation and the two-level atom expansion opacity formalism.
Given the number of recently discovered galaxy-galaxy lens systems, we anticipate that a gravitationally lensed supernova will be observed within the next few years. We explore the possibility that stars in the lens galaxy will produce observable microlensing fluctuations in lensed supernova light curves. For typical parameters, we predict that ~70% of lensed SNe will show microlensing fluctuations > 0.5 mag, while ~25% will have fluctuations > 1 mag. Thus microlensing of lensed supernova will be both ubiquitous and observable. Additionally, we show that microlensing fluctuations will complicate measurements of time delays from multiply imaged supernovae: time delays accurate to better than a few days will be difficult to obtain. We also consider prospects for extracting the lens galaxy's stellar mass fraction and mass function from microlensing fluctuations via a new statistical measure, the time-weighted light curve derivative.
Recent timing observations of the double pulsar J0737-3039A/B have shown that its transverse velocity is extremely low, only 10 km/s, and nearly in the Plane of the Galaxy. With this new information, we rigorously re-examine the history and formation of this system, determining estimates of the pre-supernova companion mass, supernova kick and misalignment angle between the pre- and post-supernova orbital planes. We find that the progenitor to the recently formed `B' pulsar was probably less than 2 MSun, lending credence to suggestions that this object may not have formed in a normal supernova involving the collapse of an iron core. At the same time, the supernova kick was likely non-zero. A comparison to the history of the double-neutron-star binary B1534+12 suggests a range of possible parameters for the progenitors of these systems, which should be taken into account in future binary population syntheses and in predictions of the rate and spatial distribution of short gamma-ray burst events.
According to recent analyses of the type-Ia supernova rate as a function of redshift, delayed and prompt type-Ia supernovae (SN Ia) should explode respectively in the Galactic bulge and in the nuclear bulge, a gas rich structure with ongoing star formation, located in the central region of the Milky Way. We estimate the rate of type-Ia supernovae in the Galactic bulge and nuclear bulge. We show that this rate is insufficient by an order of magnitude to explain by positron escape from type-Ia supernovae envelopes alone the large positron injection rate into the Galactic central region, as re-observed recently by the Spectrometer on INTEGRAL, which amounts to 1.25 10^{43} e+ s^{-1} and would require 0.5 SN Ia explosions per century.
We have previously shown that spherically symmetric, inhomogeneous universe models can explain both the supernova data and the location of the first peak in the CMB spectrum without resorting to dark energy. In this work, we investigate whether it is possible to get an even better fit to the supernova data by allowing the observer to be positioned away from the origin in the spherically symmetric coordinate system. In such a scenario, the observer sees an anisotropic relation between redshifts and the luminosity distances of supernovae. The level of anisotropy allowed by the data will then constrain how far away from the origin the observer can be located, and possibly even allow for a better fit. Our analysis shows that the fit is indeed improved, but not by a significant amount. Furthermore, it shows that the supernova data do not place a rigorous constraint on how far off-center the observer can be located.
We present an algorithm to identify the types of supernova spectra, and determine their redshift and phase. This algorithm, based on the correlation techniques of Tonry & Davis, is implemented in the SuperNova IDentification code (SNID). It is used by members of the ESSENCE project to determine whether a noisy spectrum of a high-redshift supernova is indeed of type Ia, as opposed to, e.g., type Ib/c. Furthermore, by comparing the correlation redshifts obtained using SNID with those determined from narrow lines in the supernova host galaxy spectrum, we show that accurate redshifts (with a typical error < 0.01) can be determined for SNe Ia for which a spectrum of the host galaxy is unavailable. Last, the phase of an input spectrum is determined with a typical accuracy of ~3 days.
Recent investigations on the delay time of type Ia supernovae have set useful constraints on the progenitors of type Ia supernovae. Here we have calculated the evolution of close binaries consisting of a white dwarf and a main-sequence or subgiant companion. We assume that, once Roche lobe overflow occurs a small fraction of the lost mass from the system forms a circumbinary disk, which extracts the orbital angular momentum from the system through tidal torques. Our calculations indicate that the existence of circumbinary disk can enhance the mass transfer rate and cause secular orbital shrinkage. The white dwarf can grow in mass efficiently to trigger type Ia supernovae even with relatively low-mass ($\la 2 M_{\odot}$) donor stars. Thus this scenario suggest a new possible evolutionary channel to those type Ia supernovae with long delay time $\sim 1-3$ Gyr.
A nascent neutron star resulting from stellar collapse is a prodigious source of neutrinos of all flavors. While the most basic features of this neutrino emission can be estimated from simple considerations, the detailed simulation of the neutrinos' decoupling from the hot neutron star is not yet computationally tractable in its full glory, being a time-dependent six-dimensional transport problem. Nevertheless, supernova neutrino fluxes are of great interest in connection with the core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism and supernova nucleosynthesis, and as a potential probe of the supernova environment and of some of the neutrino mixing parameters that remain unknown; hence a variety of approximate transport schemes have been used to obtain results with reduced dimensionality. However, none of these approximate schemes have addressed a recent challenge to the conventional wisdom that neutrino flavor mixing cannot impact the explosion mechanism or r-process nucleosynthesis.
Cosmological measurements suggest that our universe contains a dark energy component. In order to study the dark energy evolution, we constrain a parameterized dark energy equation of state $w(z)=w_0 + w_1 \frac{z}{1+z}$ using the recent observational datasets: 157 Gold type Ia supernovae and the newly released 182 Gold type Ia supernovae by maximum likelihood method. It is found that the best fit $w(z)$ crosses -1 in the past and the present best fit value of $w(0)<-1$ obtained from 157 Gold type Ia supernovae. The crossing of -1 is not realized and $w_0=-1$ is not ruled out in $1\sigma$ confidence level for the 182 Gold type Ia supernovae. We also find that the range of parameter $w_0$ is wide even in $1\sigma$ confidence level and the best fit $w(z)$ is sensitive to the prior of $\Omega_m$.
Motivated by recent models involving off-centre ignition of type Ia supernova explosions, we undertake three-dimensional time-dependent radiation transport simulations to investigate the range of bolometric light curve properties that could be observed from supernovae in which there is a lop-sided distribution of the products from nuclear burning. We consider both a grid of artificial toy models which illustrate the conceivable range of effects and a recent three-dimensional hydrodynamical explosion model. We find that observationally significant viewing angle effects are likely to arise in such supernovae and that these may have important ramifications for the interpretation of the observed diversity of type Ia supernova and the systematic uncertainties which relate to their use as standard candles in contemporary cosmology.
We examine the possibility that a nearby supernova explosion could have caused one or more of the mass extinctions identified by palaeontologists. We discuss the likely rate of such events in the light of the recent identification of Geminga as a supernova remnant less than 100 pc away and the discovery of a millisecond pulsar about 150 pc away, and observations of SN 1987A. The fluxes of $\gamma$ radiation and charged cosmic rays on the Earth are estimated, and their effects on the Earth's ozone layer discussed. A supernova explosion of the order of 10 pc away could be expected every few hundred million years, and could destroy the ozone layer for hundreds of years, letting in potentially lethal solar ultraviolet radiation. In addition to effects on land ecology, this could entail mass destruction of plankton and reef communities, with disastrous consequences for marine life as well. A supernova extinction should be distinguishable from a meteorite impact such as the one that presumably killed the dinosaurs.
Core-collapse supernovae emit of order $10^{58}$ neutrinos and antineutrinos of all flavors over several seconds, with average energies of 10--25 MeV. In the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO), a future Galactic supernova at a distance of 10 kpc would cause several hundred events. The $\nu_\mu$ and $\nu_\tau$ neutrinos and antineutrinos are of particular interest, as a test of the supernova mechanism. In addition, it is possible to measure or limit their masses by their delay (determined from neutral-current events) relative to the $\bar{\nu}_e$ neutrinos (determined from charged-current events). Numerical results are presented for such a future supernova as seen in SNO. Under reasonable assumptions, and in the presence of the expected counting statistics, a $\nu_\mu$ or $\nu_\tau$ mass down to about 30 eV can be simply and robustly determined. This seems to be the best technique for direct measurement of these masses.
The effects of three-flavor neutrino oscillation on the supernova neutrino spectrum are studied. We calculate the expected event rate and energy spectra, and their time evolution at the Superkamiokande (SK) and the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO), by using a realistic neutrino burst model based on numerical simulations of supernova explosions. We also employ a realistic density profile based on a presupernova model for the calculation of neutrino conversion probability in supernova envelopes. These realistic models and numerical calculations allow us to quantitatively estimate the effects of neutrino oscillation in a more realistic way than previous studies. We then found that the degeneracy of the solutions of the solar neutrino problem can be broken by the combination of the SK and SNO detections of a future Galactic supernova.
We present a simple model where photons propagating in extra-galactic magnetic fields can oscillate into very light axions. The oscillations may convert some of the photons departing a distant supernova into axions, making the supernova appear dimmer and hence more distant than it really is. Averaging over different configurations of the magnetic field we find that the dimming saturates at about 1/3 of the light from the supernovae at very large redshifts. This results in a luminosity-distance vs. redshift curve almost indistinguishable from that produced by the accelerating Universe, if the axion mass and coupling scale are m ~ 10^-16 eV, M ~ 4 10^11 GeV. This phenomenon may be an alternative to the accelerating Universe for explaining supernova observations.
For several decades the energy source powering supernovae and gamma ray bursts has been a troubling mystery. Many articles on these phenomena have been content to model the consequences of an unknown "central engine" depositing a large amount of energy in a small region. In the case of supernovae this is somewhat unsettling since the type 1a supernovae are assumed to be "standardizable candles" from which important information concerning the dark energy can be derived. It should be expected that a more detailed understanding of supernovae dynamics could lead to a reduction of the errors in this relationship. Similarly, the current state of the standard model theory of gamma ray bursts, which in some cases have been associated with supernovae, has conceptual gaps not only in the central engine but also in the mechanism for jet collimation and the lack of baryon loading. We discuss here the Supersymmetric (susy) phase transition model for the central engine.
We calculated the matter effect, including both the Earth and supernova, on the detection of neutrinos from type II supernovae at the proposed Daya Bay reactor neutrino experiment. It is found that apart from the dependence on the flip probability P_H inside the supernova and the mass hierarchy of neutrinos, the amount of the Earth matter effect depends on the direction of the incoming supernova neutrinos, and reaches the biggest value when the incident angle of neutrinos is around 93^\circ. In the reaction channel \bar{\nu}_e + p --> e^+ + n the Earth matter effect can be as big as about 12%. For other detection processes the amount of the Earth matter effect is a few per cent.
We have attempted to constrain the progenitors of all supernova types, through correlations of the positions of historical supernovae with recent star formation, as traced by H-alpha emission. Through pixel statistics we have found that a large fraction of the SNII population do not show any association with current star formation, which we put down to a 'runaway' fraction of these progenitors. The SNIb/c population accurately traces the H-alpha emission, with some suggestion that the SNIc progenitors show a higher degree of correlation than the SNIb, suggesting higher mass progenitors for the former. Overall the SNIa population only show a weak correlation to the positions of HII regions, but as many as a half may be associated with a young stellar population.
Type Ia supernovae are currently the best known standard candles at cosmological distances. In addition to providing a powerful probe of dark energy they are an ideal source of information about the peculiar velocity field of the local universe. Even with the very small number of supernovae presently available it has been possible to measure the dipole and quadrupole of the local velocity field out to z~0.025. With future continuous all-sky surveys like the LSST project the luminosity distances of tens of thousands of nearby supernovae will be measured accurately. This will allow for a determination of the local velocity structure of the universe as a function of redshift with unprecedented accuracy, provided the redshifts of the host galaxies are known. Using catalogues of mock surveys we estimate that future low redshift supernova surveys will be able to probe sigma-8 to a precision of roughly 5% at 95% C.L. This is comparable to the precision in future galaxy and weak lensing surveys and with a relatively modest observational effort it will provide a crucial cross-check on future measurements of the matter power spectrum.
We present the results from the on-going radio monitoring of recent type II supernovae (SNe), including SNe 2004et, 2004dj, 2002hh, 2001em, and 2001gd. Using the Very Large Array to monitor these supernovae, we present their radio light-curves. From these data we are able to discuss parameterizations and modeling and make predictions of the nature of the progenitors based on previous research. Derived mass loss rates assume wind-established circumstellar medium, shock velocity ~10,000 km/s, wind velocity ~10 km/s, and CSM Temperature ~10,000 K.
We investigate the effects of neutrino-nucleus interactions (the nu-process) on the production of iron-peak elements in Population III core-collapse supernovae. The nu-process and the following proton and neutron capture reactions produce odd-Z iron-peak elements in complete and incomplete Si burning region. This reaction sequence enhances the abundances of Sc, Mn, and Co in the supernova ejecta. The supernova explosion models of 15 M_sol and 25 M_sol stars with the nu-process well reproduce the averaged Mn/Fe ratio observed in extremely metal-poor halo stars. In order to reproduce the observed Mn/Fe ratio, the total neutrino energy in the supernovae should be 3 - 9 x 10^{53} ergs. Stronger neutrino irradiation and other production sites are necessary to reproduce the observed Sc/Fe and Co/Fe ratios, although these ratios increase by the nu-process.
We use a series of ray-tracing experiments to determine the magnification distribution of high-redshift sources by gravitational lensing. We determine empirically the relation between magnification and redshift, for various cosmological models. We then use this relation to estimate the effect of lensing on the determination of the cosmological parameters from observations of high-z supernovae. We found that, for supernovae at redshifts z<1.8 the effect of lensing is negligible compared to the intrinsic uncertainty in the measurements. Using mock data in the range 1.8<z<8, we show that the effect of lensing can become significant. Hence, if a population of very-high-z supernovae was ever discovered, it would be crucial to fully understand the effect of lensing, before these SNe could be used to constrain cosmological models. We show that the distance moduli m-M for an open CDM universe and a LCDM universe are comparable at z>2. Therefore if supernovae up to these redshifts were ever discovered, it is still the ones in the range 0.3<z<1 that would distinguish these two models.
In the standard supernova picture, type Ib/c and type II supernovae are powered by the potential energy released in the collapse of the core of a massive star. In studying supernovae, we primarily focus on the ejecta that makes it beyond the potential well of the collapsed core. But, as we shall show in this paper, in most supernova explosions, a tenth of a solar mass or more of the ejecta is decelerated enough that it does not escape the potential well of that compact object. This material falls back onto the proto-neutron star within the first 10-15 seconds after the launch of the explosion, releasing more than 1e52erg of additional potential energy. Most of this energy is emitted in the form of neutrinos and we must understand this fallback neutrino emission if we are to use neutrino observations to study the behavior of matter at high densities. Here we present both a 1-dimensional study of fallback using energy-injected, supernova explosions and a first study of neutrino emission from fallback using a suite of 2-dimensional simulations.
Measurements of standard candles and measurements of standard rulers give an inconsistent picture of the history of the universe. This discrepancy can be explained if photon number is not conserved as computations of the luminosity distance must be modified. I show that photon number is not conserved when photons mix with chameleons in the presence of a magnetic field. The strong magnetic fields in a supernova mean that the probability of a photon converting into a chameleon in the interior of the supernova is high, this results in a large flux of chameleons at the surface of the supernova. Chameleons and photons also mix as a result of the intergalactic magnetic field. These two effects combined cause the image of the supernova to be brightened resulting in a model which fits both observations of standard candles and observations of standard rulers.
A study of the time sequence of optical colours of a large sample of nearby Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) is presented. We study the dependence of the colour time evolution with respect to the lightcurve shape, parametrized by the stretch factor. We fit the spectral template that minimizes the colour dispersion in SNe Ia, as measured through UBVRI photometry of near-by supernovae. A clear colour dependence upon lightcurve shape is found, with the narrower lightcurves being redder up to about one month past lightcurve maximum. We also derive an average reddening law, after correcting for lightcurve shape differences in intrinsic colour, that is well described by a Cardelli, Clayton & Mathis law with R_V=1.75 \pm 0.27 for 80 Type Ia supernovae with E(B-V) < 0.7 mag. A subset sample including 69 SNe with modest reddening, E(B-V)<0.25 mag, yields a significantly smaller value, R_V ~ 1, suggesting that the observed reddening of Type Ia supernovae may have a more complex origin, perhaps involving other processes beside extinction by interstellar dust in the host galaxy.
We investigate what one can hope to learn about the parameters that describe the neutrino fluxes emitted by the explosion of a galactic supernova using the observations of a megaton-size Water-Cherenkov detector. We calculate the allowed regions that can be obtained by fitting these parameters to a simulated observation of events by such a detector. All four available detection channels (inverse beta decay, charge and neutral current on oxygen and elastic scattering on electrons) are included in the fit and we use a ten dimensional parameters space. Nine parameters describe the initial neutrino fluxes and are referred to as the supernova parameters. Furthermore, we include the dependence on the Chooz mixing angle $\theta_{13}$, which controls the matter effects that the neutrino undergoes in the outer-parts of the supernova. If we do not make any extra assumption on these parameters, we show that one can hope to determine $\theta_{13}$ quite well whereas, except for the parameters describing the $\bar\nu_e$ flux, most of the supernova parameters are rather difficult to constrain, even if the four detection channels could be completely separated.
Under the fossil field hypothesis of the origin of magnetar magnetic fields, the magnetar inherits its magnetic field from its progenitor. We show that during the supernova of such a progenitor, protons may be accelerated to \sim 10^4 GeV as the supernova shock propagates in the magnetic stellar envelope. Inelastic nuclear collisions of these protons produce a flash of high-energy neutrinos arriving a few hours after thermal (10 MeV) neutrinos. The neutrino flash is characterized by energies up to O(100) GeV and durations seconds to hours, depending on the progenitor: those from smaller Type Ibc progenitors are typically shorter in duration and reach higher energies compared to those from larger Type II progenitors. A Galactic Type Ib supernova leaving behind a magnetar remnant will yield up to \sim 160 neutrino induced muon events in Super-Kamiokande, and up to \sim 7000 in a km^3 class detector such as IceCube, providing a means of probing supernova models and the presence of strong magnetic fields in the stellar envelope.
The study of the stars that explode as supernovae used to be a forensic study, working backwards from the remnants of the star. This changed in 1987 when the first progenitor star was identified in pre-explosion images. Currently there are 8 detected progenitors with another 21 non-detections, for which only a limit on the pre-explosion luminosity can be placed. This new avenue of supernova research has led to many interesting conclusions, most importantly that the progenitors of the most common supernovae, type IIP, are red supergiants as theory has long predicted. However no progenitors have been detected thus far for the hydrogen-free type Ib/c supernovae which, given the expected progenitors, is an unlikely result. Also observations have begun to show evidence that luminous blue variables, which are among the most massive stars, may directly explode as supernovae. These results contradict current stellar evolution theory. This suggests that we may need to update our understanding.
We show that the spectrum of the unusual transient SCP06F6 is consistent with emission from a cool, optically thick and carbon-rich atmosphere if the transient is located at a redshift of z~0.14. The implied extragalactic nature of the transient rules out novae, shell flashes, and V838 Mon-like events as cause of the observed brightening. The distance to SCP06F6 implies a peak magnitude of M_I ~- 18, in the regime of supernovae. While the morphology of the light curve of SCP06F6 around the peak in brightness resembles the slowly evolving Type IIn supernovae SN1994Y and SN2006gy its spectroscopic appearence differs from all previous observed supernovae. We further report the detection of an X-ray source co-incident with SCP06F6 in a target of opportunity XMM-Newton observation made during the declining phase of the transient. The X-ray luminosity of L_X ~- (5+-1)e42 erg/s is two orders of magnitude higher than observed to date from supernovae. If related to a supernova event, SCP06F6 may define a new class. An alternative, though less likely, scenario is the tidal disruption of a carbon-rich star.
Control of systematic uncertainties in the use of Type Ia supernovae as standardized distance indicators can be achieved through contrasting subsets of observationally-characterized, like supernovae. Essentially, like supernovae at different redshifts reveal the cosmology, and differing supernovae at the same redshift reveal systematics, including evolution not already corrected for by the standardization. Here we examine the strategy for use of empirically defined subsets to minimize the cosmological parameter risk, the quadratic sum of the parameter uncertainty and systematic bias. We investigate the optimal recognition of subsets within the sample and discuss some issues of observational requirements on accurately measuring subset properties. Neglecting like vs. like comparison (i.e. creating only a single Hubble diagram) can cause cosmological constraints on dark energy to be biased by 1\sigma or degraded by a factor 1.6 for a total drift of 0.02 mag. Recognition of subsets at the 0.016 mag level (relative differences) erases bias and reduces the degradation to 2%.
Photo-heating associated with reionisation and kinetic feedback from core-collapse supernovae have previously been shown to suppress the high-redshift cosmic star formation rate. Here we investigate the interplay between photo-heating and supernova feedback using a set of cosmological, smoothed particle hydrodynamics simulations. We show that photo-heating and supernova feedback mutually amplify each other's ability to suppress the star formation rate. Our results demonstrate the importance of the simultaneous, non-independent inclusion of these two processes in models of galaxy formation to estimate the strength of the total negative feedback they exert. They may therefore be of particular relevance to semi-analytic models in which the effects of photo-heating and supernova feedback are implicitly assumed to act independently of each other.
We explore the possibility to observe the effects of electron neutrinos from past galactic supernovae, through a geochemical measurement of the amount of Technetium 97 produced by neutrino-induced reactions in a Molybdenum ore. The calculations we present take into account the recent advances in our knowledge of neutrino interactions, of neutrino oscillations inside a supernova, of the solar neutrino flux at Earth and of possible failed supernovae. The predicted Technetium 97 abundance is of the order of 10^7 atoms per 10 kilotons of ore, which is close to the current geochemical experimental sensitivity. Of this, 10-20% is from supernovae. Considering the comparable size of uncertainties, more precision in the modeling of neutrino fluxes as well as of neutrino cross sections is required for a meaningful measurement.
Core-collapse supernovae are among the prime candidate sources of high energy neutrinos. Accordingly, the IceCube collaboration has started a program to search for such a signal. IceCube operates an online search for neutrino bursts, forwarding the directions of candidate events to a network of optical telescopes for immediate follow-up observations. If a supernova is identified from the optical observations, in addition to a directional coincidence a temporal photon-neutrino coincidence also needs to be established. To achieve this, we present a method for estimating the supernova explosion time from its light curve using a simple model. We test the model with supernova light curve data from SN1987A, SN2006aj and SN2008D and show that the explosion times can be determined with an accuracy of better than a few hours.
The double conversion of the neutrino helicity $\nu_L \to \nu_R \to \nu_L$ has been analyzed for supernova conditions, where the first stage is due to the interaction of the neutrino magnetic moment with plasma electrons and protons in the supernova core, and the second stage, due to the resonance spin flip of the neutrino in the magnetic field of the supernova envelope. It is shown that, in the presence of the neutrino magnetic moment in the range $10^{-13} \mu_{\rm B} < \mu_\nu < 10^{-12} \mu_{\rm B}$ and a magnetic field of $\sim 10^{13}$ G between the neutrinosphere and the shock-stagnation region, an additional energy of about $10^{51}$ erg, which is sufficient for a supernova explosion, can be injected into this region during a typical shock-stagnation time.
The very peculiar abundance patterns observed in extremely metal-poor (EMP) stars can not be explained by ordinary supernova nucleosynthesis but can be well-reproduced by nucleosynthesis in hyper-energetic and hyper-aspherical explosions, i.e., Hypernovae (HNe). Previously, such HNe have been observed only as Type Ic supernovae. Here, we examine the properties of recent Type Ib supernovae (SNe Ib). In particular, SN Ib 2008D associated with the luminous X-ray transient 080109 is found to be a more energetic explosion than normal core-collapse supernovae. We estimate that the progenitor's main sequence mass is 20--25 M_sun and a kinetic energy of explosion is ~ 6 x 10^{51} erg. These properties are intermediate between those of normal SNe and hypernovae associated with gamma-ray bursts. Such energetic SNe Ib can make important contribution to the chemical enrichment in the early Universe.
We present simulations for the Dark Energy Survey (DES) using a new code suite (SNANA) that generates realistic supernova light curves accounting for atmospheric seeing conditions and intrinsic supernova luminosity variations using MLCS2k2 or SALT2 models. Errors include stat-noise from photo-statistics and sky noise. We applied SNANA to simulate DES supernova observations and employed an MLCS-based fitter to obtain the distance modulus for each simulated light curve. We harnessed the light curves in order to study selection biases for high-redshift supernovae and to constrain the optimal DES observing strategy using the Dark Energy Task Force figure of merit.
Binary star systems containing a neutron star or a black hole with an evolved, massive star are dynamically perturbed when the latter undergoes a supernova explosion. It is possible that the natal kick received by the newly-formed neutron star in the supernova may place the stellar remnants into a bound, highly eccentric orbit. In this case, the two compact objects can tidally interact and spiral into one another on a short timescale. The interaction with an accretion disc of supernova debris is also considered. We quantify the likelihood of such events and show that they would be expected to produce a high-energy transient, possibly a short gamma-ray burst, typically within a few days of the supernova.
Dome A, the highest plateau in Antarctica, is being developed as a site for an astronomical observatory. The planned telescopes and instrumentation and the unique site characteristics are conducive toward Type Ia supernova surveys for cosmology. A self-contained search and survey over five years can yield a spectro-photometric time series of ~1000 z<0.08 supernovae. These can serve to anchor the Hubble diagram and quantify the relationship between luminosities and heterogeneities within the Type Ia supernova class, reducing systematics. Larger aperture (>4-m) telescopes are capable of discovering supernovae shortly after explosion out to z~3. These can be fed to space telescopes, and can isolate systematics and extend the redshift range over which we measure the expansion history of the universe.
Much progress in realistic modeling of core-collapse supernovae has occurred recently through the availability of multi-teraflop machines and the increasing sophistication of supernova codes. These improvements are enabling simulations with enough realism that the explosion mechanism, long a mystery, may soon be delineated. We briefly describe the CHIMERA code, a supernova code we have developed to simulate core-collapse supernovae in 1, 2, and 3 spatial dimensions. We then describe the results of an ongoing suite of 2D simulations initiated from a 12, 15, 20, and 25 solar mass progenitor. These have all exhibited explosions and are currently in the expanding phase with the shock at between 5,000 and 20,000 km. We also briefly describe an ongoing simulation in 3 spatial dimensions initiated from the 15 solar mass progenitor.
We consider the supernova shock effects, the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein (MSW) effects, the collective effects, and the Earth matter effects in the detection of type II supernova neutrinos on the Earth. It is found that the event number of supernova neutrinos depends on the neutrino mass hierarchy, the neutrino mixing angle $\theta_{13}$, and neutrino masses. Therefore, we propose possible methods to identify the mass hierarchy and acquire information about $\theta_{13}$ and neutrino masses by detecting supernova neutrinos. We apply these methods to some current neutrino experiments.
The Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background (DSNB) is the weak glow of MeV neutrinos and antineutrinos from distant core-collapse supernovae. The DSNB has not been detected yet, but the Super-Kamiokande (SK) 2003 upper limit on the electron antineutrino flux is close to predictions, now quite precise, based on astrophysical data. If SK is modified with dissolved gadolinium to reduce detector backgrounds and increase the energy range for analysis, then it should detect the DSNB at a rate of a few events per year, providing a new probe of supernova neutrino emission and the cosmic core-collapse rate. If the DSNB is not detected, then new physics will be required. Neutrino astronomy, while uniquely powerful, has proven extremely difficult -- only the Sun and the nearby Supernova 1987A have been detected to date -- so the promise of detecting new sources soon is exciting indeed.
We compare the radial locations of 178 core-collapse supernovae to the R-band and H alpha light distributions of their host galaxies. When the galaxies are split into `disturbed' and `undisturbed' categories, a striking difference emerges. The disturbed galaxies have a central excess of core-collapse supernovae, and this excess is almost completely dominated by supernovae of types Ib, Ic and Ib/c, whereas type II supernovae dominate in all other environments. The difference cannot easily be explained by metallicity or extinction effects, and thus we propose that this is direct evidence for a stellar initial mass function that is strongly weighted towards high mass stars, specifically in the central regions of disturbed galaxies.
The short-lived radioisotope $^{60}$Fe requires production in a core collapse supernova or AGB star immediately before its incorporation into the earliest solar system solids. Shock waves from a somewhat distant supernova, or a relatively nearby AGB star, have the right speeds to simultaneously trigger the collapse of a dense molecular cloud core and to inject shock wave material into the resulting protostar. A new set of FLASH2.5 adaptive mesh refinement hydrodynamical models shows that the injection efficiency depends sensitively on the assumed shock thickness and density. Supernova shock waves appear to be thin enough to inject the amount of shock wave material necessary to match the short-lived radioisotope abundances measured for primitive meteorites. Planetary nebula shock waves from AGB stars, however, appear to be too thick to achieve the required injection efficiencies. These models imply that a supernova pulled the trigger that led to the formation of our solar system.
We present constraints on the progenitor metallicities of core-collapse supernovae. To date, nearly all metallicity constraints have been inferred from indirect methods such as metallicity gradients in host galaxies, luminosities of host galaxies, or derived global galaxy metallicities. Here, progenitor metallicities are derived from optical spectra taken at the sites of nearby supernovae, from the ratio of strong emission lines found in their host HII regions.We present results from the spectra of 74 host HII regions and discuss the implications that these have on the nature of core-collapse supernova progenitors. Overall, while we find that the mean metallicity of type Ibc environments is higher than that of type II events, this difference is smaller than observed in previous studies. There is only a 0.06 dex difference in the mean metallicity values, at a statistical significance of ~1.5 sigma, while using a KS-test we find that the two metallicity distributions are marginally consistent with being drawn from the same parent population (probability >10%). This argues that progenitor metallicity is not a dominant parameter in deciding supernovae type, with progenitor mass and/or binarity playing a much more significant role.
I review the physics of the Diffuse Supernova Neutrino flux (or Background, DSNB), in the context of future searches at the next generation of neutrino observatories. The theory of the DSNB is discussed in its fundamental elements, namely the cosmological rate of supernovae, neutrino production inside a core collapse supernova, redshift, and flavor oscillation effects. The current upper limits are also reviewed, and results are shown for the rates and energy distributions of the events expected at future liquid argon and liquid scintillator detectors of O(10) kt mass, and water Cherenkov detectors up to a 0.5 Mt mass. Perspectives are given on the significance of future observations of the DSNB, both at the discovery and precision phases, for the investigation of the physics of supernovae and of the properties of the neutrino.
I review multiwavelength observations of material seen around different types of evolved massive stars (i.e. red supergiants, yellow hypergiants, luminous blue variables, B[e] supergiants, and Wolf-Rayet stars), concentrating on diagnostics of mass, composition, and kinetic energy in both local and distant examples. Circumstellar material has significant implications for the evolutionary state of the star, the role of episodic mass loss in stellar evolution, and the roles of binarity and rotation in shaping the ejecta. This mass loss determines the type of supernova that results via the stripping of the star's outer layers, but the circumstellar gas can also profoundly influence the immediate pre-supernova environment. Dense circumstellar material can actually change the type of supernova that is seen when it is illuminated by the supernova or heated by the blast wave. As such, unresolved circumstellar material illuminated by distant supernovae can provide a way to study mass loss in massive stars in distant environments.
Approximately 2.8 Myr before the present our planet was subjected to the debris of a supernova explosion. The terrestrial proxy for this event was the discovery of live atoms of 60Fe in a deep-sea ferromanganese crust. The signature for this supernova event should also reside in magnetite Fe3O4 microfossils produced by magnetotactic bacteria extant at the time of the Earth-supernova interaction, provided the bacteria preferentially uptake iron from fine-grained iron oxides and ferric hydroxides. Using estimates for the terrestrial supernova 60Fe flux, combined with our empirically derived microfossil concentrations in a deep-sea drill core, we deduce a conservative estimate of the ^{60}{Fe} fraction as 60Fe/Fe ~ 3.6 x 10^{-15}. This value sits comfortably within the sensitivity limit of present accelerator mass spectrometry capabilities. The implication is that a biogenic signature of this cosmic event is detectable in the Earth's fossil record.
The rate evolution of subluminous Type Ia Supernovae is presented using data from the Supernova Legacy Survey. This sub-sample represents the faint and rapidly-declining light-curves of the observed supernova Ia (SN Ia) population here defined by low stretch values (s<0.8). Up to redshift z=0.6, we find 18 photometrically-identified subluminous SNe Ia, of which six have spectroscopic redshift (and three are spectroscopically-confirmed SNe Ia). The evolution of the subluminous volumetric rate is constant or slightly decreasing with redshift, in contrast to the increasing SN Ia rate found for the normal stretch population, although a rising behaviour is not conclusively ruled out. The subluminous sample is mainly found in early-type galaxies with little or no star formation, so that the rate evolution is consistent with a galactic mass dependent behavior: $r(z)=A\times M_g$, with $A=(1.1\pm0.3)\times10^{-14}$ SNe per year and solar mass.
Supernovae are the most energetic stellar events and influence the interstellar medium by their gasdynamics and energetics. By this, both also affect the star formation positively and negatively. In this paper, we review the development of the complexity of investigations aiming at understanding the interchange between supernovae and their released hot gas with the star-forming molecular clouds. Commencing from analytical studies the paper advances to numerical models of supernova feedback from superbubble scales to galaxy structure. We also discuss parametrizations of star-formation and supernova-energy transfer efficiencies. Since evolutionary models from the interstellar medium to galaxies are numerous and apply multiple recipes of these parameters, only a representative selection of studies can be discussed here.
The discovery of dark energy by the first generation of high-redshift supernova surveys has generated enormous interest beyond cosmology and has dramatic implications for fundamental physics. Distance measurements using supernova explosions are the most direct probes of the expansion history of the Universe, making them extremely useful tools to study the cosmic fabric and the properties of gravity at the largest scales. The past decade has seen the confirmation of the original results. Type Ia supernovae are among the leading techniques to obtain high-precision measurements of the dark energy equation of state parameter, and in the near future, its time dependence. The success of these efforts depends on our ability to understand a large number of effects, mostly of astrophysical nature, influencing the observed flux at Earth. The frontier now lies in understanding if the observed phenomenon is due to vacuum energy, albeit its unnatural density, or some exotic new physics. Future surveys will address the systematic effects with improved calibration procedures and provide thousands of supernovae for detailed studies.
The probability of observing "supernova - gamma-ray burst" (GRB) pair events and recurrent GRBs from one galaxy in a time interval of several years has been estimated. Supernova explosions in binary systems accompanied by the formation of a short-lived pair of compact objects can be the sources of such events. If a short GRB is generated during the collision of a pair, then approximately each of ~300 short GRBs with redshift z must have an optical precursor - a supernova in the observer's time interval <2(1+z)yr. If the supernova explosion has the pattern of a hypernova, then a successive observation of long and short GRBs is possible. The scenario for the generation of multiple GRBs in collapsing galactic nuclei is also discussed.
Although there is a nearly universal agreement that type Ia supernovae are associated with the thermonuclear disruption of a CO white dwarf, the exact nature of their progenitors is still unknown. The single degenerate scenario envisages a white dwarf accreting matter from a non-degenerate companion in a binary system. Nuclear energy of the accreted matter is released in the form of electromagnetic radiation or gives rise to numerous classical nova explosions prior to the supernova event. We show that combined X-ray output of supernova progenitors and statistics of classical novae predicted in the single degenerate scenario are inconsistent with X-ray and optical observations of nearby early type galaxies and galaxy bulges. White dwarfs accreting from a donor star in a binary system and detonating at the Chandrasekhar mass limit can account for no more than ~5% of type Ia supernovae observed in old stellar populations.
We study the detectability of neutrino bursts from nearby direct black hole-forming collapses (failed supernovae) at Megaton detectors. Due to their high energetics, these bursts could be identified - by the time coincidence of N >= 2 or N >= 3 events within a ~ 1 s time window - from as far as ~ 4-5 Mpc away. This distance encloses several supernova-rich galaxies, so that failed supernova bursts could be detected at a rate of up to one per decade, comparable to the expected rate of the more common, but less energetic, neutron star-forming collapses. Thus, the detection of a failed supernova within the lifetime of a Mt detector is realistic. It might give the first evidence of direct black hole formation, with important implications on the physics of this phenomenon.
We study the compression of information present in the correlated perturbations to the luminosity distance in the low-redshift ($z<0.1$) supernovae Ia due to peculiar velocities of these supernovae. We demonstrate that the na\"{i}ve compression into angular velocity power spectrum does not work efficiently, due to thickness of the spherical shell over which the supernovae are measured. Instead, we show that measurements can be compressed into measurements of $f^2P(k)$, where $f$ is the logarithmic rate of growth of linear perturbations and $P(k)$ is their power spectrum. We develop an optimal quadratic estimator and show that it recovers all information for $\Lambda CDM$ models for surveys of $N\sim10,000$ or more supernovae. We explicitly demonstrate robustness with respect to the assumed fiducial model and the number of power spectrum bins. Using mock catalogues of SNe Ia we estimate that future low redshift surveys will be able to probe $\sigma_8$ to 6% accuracy with $10,000$ SNe Ia.
In this paper we compare the performances of the chi-square and median likelihood analysis in the determination of cosmological constraints using type Ia supernovae data. We perform a statistical analysis using the 307 supernovae of the Union 2 compilation of the Supernova Cosmology Project and find that the chi-square statistical analysis yields tighter cosmological constraints than the median statistic if only supernovae data is taken into account. We also show that when additional measurements from the Cosmic Microwave Background and Baryonic Acoustic Oscillations are considered, the combined cosmological constraints are not strongly dependent on whether one applies the chi-square statistic or the median statistic to the supernovae data. This indicates that, when complementary information from other cosmological probes is taken into account, the performances of the chi-square and median statistics are very similar, demonstrating the robustness of the statistical analysis.
Galactic cosmic rays are believed to be accelerated at supernova remnants via diffusive shock acceleration. Though this mechanism gives fairly robust predictions for the spectrum of particles accelerated at the shock, the spectrum of the cosmic rays which are eventually injected in the interstellar medium is more uncertain and depends on the details of the process of particle escape from the shock. Knowing the spectral shape of these escaping particles is of crucial importance in order to assess the validity of the supernova remnant paradigm for cosmic ray origin. Moreover, after escaping from a supernova remnant, cosmic rays interact with the surrounding ambient gas and produce gamma rays in the vicinity of the remnant itself. The detection of this radiation can be used as an indirect proof of the fact that the supernova remnant was indeed accelerating cosmic rays in the past.
Stars with helium cores between ~64 and 133 M_sun are theoretically predicted to die as pair-instability supernovae. This requires very massive progenitors, which are theoretically prohibited for Pop II/I stars within the Galactic stellar mass limit due to mass loss via line-driven winds. However, the runaway collision of stars in a dense, young star cluster could create a merged star with sufficient mass to end its life as a pair-instability supernova, even with enhanced mass loss at non-zero metallicity. We show that the predicted rate from this mechanism is consistent with the inferred volumetric rate of roughly ~2x10^-9 Mpc^-3 yr^-1 of the two observed pair-instability supernovae, SN 2007bi and PTF 10nmn, neither of which have metal-free host galaxies. Contrary to prior literature, only pair-instability supernovae at low redshifts z<2 will be observable with the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST). We estimate the telescope will observe ~10^2 such events per year that originate from the collisional runaway mergers in clusters.
Core-collapse supernovae are dramatic explosions marking the catastrophic end of massive stars. The only means to get direct information about the supernova engine is from observations of neutrinos emitted by the forming neutron star, and through gravitational waves which are produced when the hydrodynamic flow or the neutrino flux is not perfectly spherically symmetric. The multidimensionality of the supernova engine, which breaks the sphericity of the central core such as convection, rotation, magnetic fields, and hydrodynamic instabilities of the supernova shock, is attracting great attention as the most important ingredient to understand the long-veiled explosion mechanism. Based on our recent work, we summarize properties of gravitational waves, neutrinos, and explosive nucleosynthesis obtained in a series of our multidimensional hydrodynamic simulations and discuss how the mystery of the central engines can be unraveled by deciphering these multimessengers produced under the thick veils of massive stars.
Over the last 20 years, supernovae have become a key tool to constrain the expansion history of the Universe through the construction of Hubble diagrams, using luminosity distances to supernovae belonging to the "Ia" subtype. This technique was key for the discovery that the expansion of the Universe is now accelerating. We review the principle and difficulties of the measurements, the classification and diversity of supernovae, and the physics of the explosion. We discuss the systematic uncertainties affecting the cosmological conclusions with some emphasis on photometric calibration. We describe the major supernova cosmology surveys, the presented analyses and their conclusions, together with the present status of the field. We conclude on the expectations for the near future.
Understanding the progenitors of core collapse supernovae and their population statistics is a key ingredient for many current studies in astronomy but as yet this remains elusive. Using the MESA stellar evolution code we study the dependence of the lower mass limit for making core collapse supernovae (SNe) as function of initial stellar metallicity. We find that this mass limit is smallest at approximately [Z] = -2 with a value of ~ 8.3 Msun. At [Z] = 0 the limit is ~ 9.5 Msun and continues to rise with higher metallicity. As a consequence, for a fixed initial mass function the supernova rate may be 20% to 25% higher at [Z] = -2. This affects the association of observed SN rates as a probe for the cosmological star formation rate, rate predictions for supernova surveys, and population synthesis studies.
Several recently discovered peculiar type Ia supernovae seem to demand an altogether new formation theory that might help explain the puzzling dissimilarities between them and the standard type Ia supernovae. The most striking aspect of the observational analysis is the necessity of invoking super-Chandrasekhar white dwarfs having masses ~ 2.1-2.8M_sun, M_sun being the mass of Sun, as their most probable progenitors. Strongly magnetized white dwarfs having super-Chandrasekhar masses were already established to be potential candidates for the progenitors of peculiar type Ia supernovae. Owing to the Landau quantization of the underlying electron degenerate gas, theoretical results yielded the observationally inferred mass range. Here we sketch a possible evolutionary scenario by which super-Chandrasekhar white dwarfs could be formed by accretion on to a commonly observed magnetized white dwarf, invoking the phenomenon of flux freezing. This opens the multiple possible evolutions ending in supernova explosions of super-Chandrasekhar white dwarfs having masses within the range stated above. We point out that our proposal has observational support, like, the recent discovery of a large number of magnetized white dwarfs by SDSS.
The continuing difficulty of achieving a reliable explosion in simulations of core-collapse supernovae, especially for more massive stars, has led to speculation concerning the observable transients that might be produced if such a supernova fails. Even if a prompt outgoing shock fails to form in a collapsing presupernova star, one must still consider the hydrodynamic response of the star to the abrupt loss of mass via neutrinos as the core forms a protoneutron star. Following a suggestion by Nadezhin (1980), we calculate the hydrodynamical responses of typical supernova progenitor stars to the rapid loss of approximately 0.2 to 0.5 M_sun of gravitational mass from their centers. In a red supergiant star, a very weak supernova with total kinetic energy ~ 10^47 erg results. The binding energy of a large fraction of the hydrogen envelope before the explosion is of the same order and, depending upon assumptions regarding the neutrino loss rates, most of it is ejected. Ejection speeds are ~ 100 km/s and luminosities ~ 10^39 erg/s are maintained for about a year. A significant part of the energy comes from the recombination of hydrogen. The color of the explosion is extremely red and the events bear some similarity to "luminous red novae," but have much lower speeds.
We explore the effect of pulsars, in particular those born with millisecond periods, on their surrounding supernova ejectas. While they spin down, fast-spinning pulsars release their tremendous rotational energy in the form of a relativistic magnetized wind that can affect the dynamics and luminosity of the supernova. We estimate the thermal and non thermal radiations expected from these specific objects, concentrating at times a few years after the onset of the explosion. We find that the bolometric light curves present a high luminosity plateau (that can reach $10^{43-44}\,$erg/s) over a few years. An equally bright TeV gamma-ray emission, and a milder X-ray peak (of order $10^{40-42}\,$erg/s) could also appear a few months to a few years after the explosion, as the pulsar wind nebula emerges, depending on the injection parameters. The observations of these signatures by following the emission of a large number of supernovae could have important implications for the understanding of core-collapse supernovae and reveal the nature of the remnant compact object.
Observational evidence suggests that some very massive stars in the local Universe may die as pair-instability supernovae. We present 2D simulations of the pair-instability supernova of a non-zero metallicity star. We find that very little mixing occurs in this explosion because metals in the stellar envelope drive strong winds that strip the hydrogen envelope from the star prior to death. Consequently, a reverse shock cannot form and trigger fluid instabilities during the supernova. Only weak mixing driven by nuclear burning occurs in the earliest stages of the supernova, and it is too weak to affect the observational signatures of the explosion.
We present radio observations of two supernova remnants and four planetary nebulae with the Very Large Array and the Green Bank Telescope. These objects are part of a larger sample of radio sources, discussed in a previous paper, counterpart of the MIPSGAL 24-micron compact bubbles. For the two supernova remnants we combined the interferometric observations with single-dish data to obtain both a high resolution and a good sensitivity to extended structures. We discuss in detail the entire combination procedure adopted and the reliability of the resulting maps. For one supernova remnant we pose a more stringent upper limit for the flux density of its undetected pulsar, and we also show prominent spectral index spatial variations, probably due to inhomogeneities in the magnetic field and in its ejecta or to an interaction between the supernova shock and molecular clouds. We eventually use the 5-GHz maps of the four planetary nebulae to estimate their distance and their ionized mass.
Relations between radio surface brightness ($\Sigma$) and diameter ($D$) of supernova remnants (SNRs) are important in astronomy. In this paper, following the work Duric \& Seaquist (1986) at adiabatic phase, we carefully investigate shell-type supernova remnants at radiative phase, and obtain theoretical $\Sigma$-$D$ relation at radiative phase of shell-type supernova remnants at 1 GHz. By using these theoretical $\Sigma$-$D$ relations at adiabatic phase and radiative phase, we also roughly determine phases of some supernova remnant from observation data.
We report on the VLBI detection of supernova SN2011dh at 22GHz using a subset of the EVN array. The observations took place 14 days after the discovery of the supernova, thus resulting in a VLBI image of the youngest radio-loud supernova ever. We provide revised coordinates for the supernova with milli-arcsecond precision, linked to the ICRF. The recovered flux density is a factor 2 below the EVLA flux density reported by other authors at the same frequency and epoch of our observations. This discrepancy could be due to extended emission detected with the EVLA or to calibration problems in the VLBI and/or EVLA observations.
Supernova theory, numerical and analytic, has made remarkable progress in the past decade. This progress was made possible by more sophisticated simulation tools, especially for neutrino transport, improved microphysics, and deeper insights into the role of hydrodynamic instabilities. Violent, large-scale nonradial mass motions are generic in supernova cores. The neutrino-heating mechanism, aided by nonradial flows, drives explosions, albeit low-energy ones, of ONeMg-core and some Fe-core progenitors. The characteristics of the neutrino emission from new-born neutron stars were revised, new features of the gravitational-wave signals were discovered, our notion of supernova nucleosynthesis was shattered, and our understanding of pulsar kicks and explosion asymmetries was significantly improved. But simulations also suggest that neutrino-powered explosions might not explain the most energetic supernovae and hypernovae, which seem to demand magnetorotational driving. Now that modeling is being advanced from two to three dimensions, more realism, new perspectives, and hopefully answers to long-standing questions are coming into reach.
Massive stars are essential to understand a variety of branches of astronomy including galaxy and star cluster evolution, nucleosynthesis and supernovae, pulsars and black holes. It has become evident that massive star evolution is very diverse, being sensitive to metallicity, binarity, rotation, and possibly magnetic fields. While the problem to obtain a good statistical observational database is alleviated by current large spectroscopic surveys, it remains a challenge to model these diverse paths of massive stars towards their violent end stage.   We show that the main sequence stage offers the best opportunity to gauge the relevance of the various possible evolutionary scenarios. This also allows to sketch the post-main sequence evolution of massive stars, for which observations of Wolf-Rayet stars give essential clues. Recent supernova discoveries due to the current boost in transient searches allow tentative mappings of progenitor models with supernova types, including pair instability supernovae and gamma-ray bursts.
Mass loss remains one of the primary uncertainties in stellar evolution. In the most massive stars, mass loss dictates the circumstellar medium and can significantly alter the fate of the star. Mass loss is caused by a variety of wind mechanisms and also through binary interactions. Supernovae are excellent probes of this mass loss, both the circumstellar material and the reduced mass of the hydrogen-rich envelope. In this paper, we focus on the effects of reducing the hydrogen-envelope mass on the supernova light curve, studying both the shock breakout and peak light curve emission for a wide variety of mass loss scenarios. Even though the trends of this mass loss will be masked somewhat by variations caused by different progenitors, explosion energies, and circumstellar media, these trends have significant effects on the supernova light-curves that should be seen in supernova surveys. We conclude with a comparison of our results to a few key observations.
Supernovae are known to be the dominant energy source for driving turbulence in the interstellar medium. Yet, their effect on magnetic field amplification in spiral galaxies is still poorly understood. Previous analytical models, based on the evolution of isolated, non-interacting supernova remnants, predicted a dominant vertical pumping that would render dynamo action improbable. In the present work, we address the issue of vertical transport, which is thought to be the key process that inhibits dynamo action in the galactic context. We aim to demonstrate that supernova driving is a powerful mechanism to amplify galactic magnetic fields. We conduct direct numerical simulations in the framework of resistive magnetohydrodynamics. Our local box model of the interstellar medium comprises optically-thin radiative cooling, an external gravitational potential, and background shear. Dynamo coefficients for mean-field models are measured by means of passive test fields. Our simulations show that supernova-driven turbulence in conjunction with shear leads to an exponential amplification of the mean magnetic field. We found turbulent pumping to be directed inward and approximately balanced by a galactic wind.
We study a possibility of detection of circumstellar absorption lines of Na I D$_{1,2}$ and Ca II H,K in spectra of type IIP supernovae at the photospheric epoch. The modelling shows that the circumstellar lines of Na I doublet will not be seen in type IIP supernovae for moderate wind density, e.g., characteristic of SN 1999em, whereas rather pronounced Ca II lines with P Cygni profile should be detectable. A similar model is used to describe Na I and Ca II circumstellar lines seen in SN 1998S, type IIL with a dense wind. We show that line intensities in this supernova are reproduced, if one assumes an ultraviolet excess, which is caused primarily by the comptonization of supernova radiation in the shock wave.
Supernovae have been confirmed to redshift z ~ 1.7 for type Ia (thermonuclear detonation of a white dwarf) and to z ~ 0.7 for type II (collapse of the core of the star). The subclass type IIn supernovae are luminous core-collapse explosions of massive stars and, unlike other types, are very bright in the ultraviolet, which should enable them to be found optically at redshifts z ~ 2 and higher. In addition, the interaction of the ejecta with circumstellar material creates strong, long-lived emission lines that allow spectroscopic confirmation of many events of this type at z ~ 2 for 3 - 5 years after explosion. Here we report three spectroscopically confirmed type IIn supernovae, at redshifts z = 0.808, 2.013 and 2.357, detected in archival data using a method designed to exploit these properties at z ~ 2. Type IIn supernovae directly probe the formation of massive stars at high redshift. The number found to date is consistent with the expectations of a locally measured stellar initial mass function, but not with an evolving initial mass function proposed to explain independent observations at low and high redshift.
SN 2011fe was the nearest and best-observed type Ia supernova in a generation, and brought previous incomplete datasets into sharp contrast with the detailed new data. In retrospect, documenting spectroscopic behaviors of type Ia supernovae has been more often limited by sparse and incomplete temporal sampling than by consequences of signal-to-noise ratios, telluric features, or small sample sizes. As a result, type Ia supernovae have been primarily studied insofar as parameters discretized by relative epochs and incomplete temporal snapshots near maximum light. Here we discuss a necessary next step toward consistently modeling and directly measuring spectroscopic observables of type Ia supernova spectra. In addition, we analyze current spectroscopic data in the parameter space defined by empirical metrics, which will be relevant even after progenitors are observed and detailed models are refined.
This chapter concentrates on the deaths of very massive stars, the events leading up to their deaths, and how mass loss affects the resulting death. The previous three chapters emphasized the theory of wind mass loss, eruptions, and core collapse physics, but here we emphasize mainly the observational properties of the resulting death throes. Mass loss through winds, eruptions, and interacting binaries largely determines the wide variety of different types of supernovae that are observed, as well as the circumstellar environments into which the supernova blast waves expand. Connecting these observed properties of the explosions to the initial masses of their progenitor stars is, however, an enduring challenge and is especially difficult for very massive stars. Superluminous supernovae, pair instability supernovae, gamma ray bursts, and "failed" supernovae are all end fates that have been proposed for very massive stars, but the range of initial masses or other conditions leading to each of these (if they actually occur) are still very certain. Extrapolating to infer the role of very massive stars in the early universe is essentially unencumbered by observational constraints and still quite dicey.
In the past few years, gamma-ray astronomy has entered a golden age thanks to two major breakthroughs: Cherenkov telescopes on the ground and the Large Area Telescope (LAT) onboard the Fermi satellite. The sample of supernova remnants (SNRs) detected at gamma-ray energies is now much larger: it goes from evolved supernova remnants interacting with molecular clouds up to young shell-type supernova remnants and historical supernova remnants. Studies of SNRs are of great interest, as these analyses are directly linked to the long standing issue of the origin of the Galactic cosmic rays. In this context, pulsar wind nebulae (PWNe) need also to be considered since they evolve in conjunction with SNRs. As a result, they frequently complicate interpretation of the gamma-ray emission seen from SNRs and they could also contribute directly to the local cosmic ray spectrum, particularly the leptonic component. This paper reviews the current results and thinking on SNRs and PWNe and their connection to cosmic ray production.
Supernovae are important probes of the properties of stars at high redshifts because they can be detected at early epochs and their masses can be inferred from their light curves. Direct detection of the first cosmic explosions in the universe will only be possible with JWST, WFIRST and the next generation of extremely large telescopes. But strong gravitational lensing by massive clusters, like those in the Frontier Fields, could reveal supernovae at slightly lower redshifts now by magnifying their flux by factors of 10 or more. We find that Frontier Fields will likely discover dozens of core-collapse supernovae at 5 $ < z <$ 12. Future surveys of cluster lenses similar in scope to Frontier Fields by JWST might find hundreds of these events out to $z \sim$ 15 - 17. Besides revealing the masses of early stars, these ancient supernovae could also constrain cosmic star formation rates in the era of first galaxy formation.
Recent observations have revealed an amazing diversity of extremely luminous supernovae, seemingly increasing in radiant energy without bound. We consider here the physical limits of what existing models can provide for the peak luminosity and total radiated energy for non-relativistic, isotropic stellar explosions. The brightest possible supernova is a Type I explosion powered by a sub-millisecond magnetar. Such models can reach a peak luminosity of $\rm 2\times10^{46}\ erg\ s^{-1}$ and radiate a total energy of $\rm 4 \times10^{52}\ erg$. Other less luminous models are also explored, including prompt hyper-energetic explosions in red supergiants, pulsational-pair instability supernovae, and pair-instability supernovae. Approximate analytic expressions and limits are given for each case. Excluding magnetars, the peak luminosity is near $\rm 1\times10^{44}\ erg\ s^{-1}$ for the brightest models. The corresponding limits on total radiated power are $\rm3 \times 10^{51}\ erg$ (Type I) and $\rm1 \times 10^{51}\ erg$ (Type II). A magnetar-based model for the recent transient event, ASASSN-15lh is presented that strains, but does not exceed the limits of what the model can provide.
Supernova remnants are believed to be the sources of galactic cosmic rays. Within this framework, diffusive shock acceleration must operate in these objects and accelerate protons all the way up to PeV energies. To do so, significant amplification of the magnetic field at the shock is required. The goal of this paper is to investigate the capability of supernova remnants to accelerate PeV protons. We present analytic estimates of the maximum energy of accelerated protons under various assumptions about the field amplification at supernova remnant shocks. We show that acceleration up to PeV energies is problematic in all the scenarios considered. This implies that either a different (more efficient) mechanism of field amplification operates at supernova remnant shocks, or that the sources of galactic cosmic rays in the PeV energy range should be searched somewhere else.
Type Ia supernovae are a powerful cosmological probe, that gave the first strong evidence that the expansion of the universe is accelerating. Here we provide an overview of how supernovae can go further to reveal information about what is causing the acceleration, be it dark energy or some modification to our laws of gravity. We first summarise the many different approaches used to explain or test the acceleration, including parametric models (like the standard model, LambdaCDM), non-parametric models, dark fluid models such as quintessence, and extensions to standard gravity. We also show how supernova data can be used beyond the Hubble diagram, to give information on gravitational lensing and peculiar velocities that can be used to distinguish between models that predict the same expansion history. Finally, we review the methods of statistical inference that are commonly used, making a point of separating parameter estimation from model selection.
Thirteen explosion sites of type II-P and II-L supernovae in nearby galaxies have been observed using integral field spectroscopy, enabling both spatial and spectral study of the explosion sites. We used the properties of the parent stellar population of the coeval supernova progenitor star to derive its metallicity and initial mass (c.f. Paper I). The spectrum of the parent stellar population yields the estimates of metallicity via strong-line method, and age via comparison with simple stellar population (SSP) models. These metallicity and age parameters are adopted for the progenitor star. Age, or lifetime of the star, was used to derive initial (ZAMS) mass of the star by comparing with stellar evolution models. With this technique, we were able to determine metallicity and initial mass of the SN progenitors in our sample. Our result indicates that some type-II supernova progenitors may have been stars with mass comparable to SN Ib/c progenitors.
We report Swift/BAT survey observations of the Tycho's supernova remnant, performed over a period of 104 months since the mission's launch. The remnant is detected with high significance (>10 sigma) below 50 keV. We detect significant hard X-ray emission in the 60-85 keV band, above the continuum level predicted by a simple synchrotron model. The location of the observed excess is consistent with line emission from radioactive Titanium-44, so far reported only for Type II supernova explosions. We discuss the implications of these results in the context of the galactic supernova rate, and nucleosynthesis in Type Ia supernova.
We construct a mass model of the cluster MACS J1149.6+2223 to study the expected properties of multiple images of SN Refsdal, the first example of a gravitationally lensed supernova with resolved multiple images recently reported by Kelly et al. We find that the best-fit model predicts six supernova images in total, i.e., two extra images in addition to the observed four Einstein cross supernova images S1--S4. One extra image is predicted to have appeared about 17 years ago, whereas the other extra image is predicted to appear in about one year from the appearance of S1--S4, which is a testable prediction with near future observations. The predicted magnification factors of individual supernova images range from $\sim 18$ for the brightest image to $\sim 4$ for the faint extra images. Confronting these predictions with future observations should provide an unprecedented opportunity to improve our understanding of cluster mass distributions.
On February 23, 1987 we collected 24 neutrinos from the explosion of a blue super-giant star in the Large Magellanic Cloud confirming the basic paradigm of core-collapse supernova. During the many years we have been waiting for a repeat of that momentous day, the number and size of neutrino detectors around the world has grown considerably. If the neutrinos from the next supernova in our Galaxy arrive tomorrow we shall collect upwards of tens of thousands of events and next generation detectors will increase the amount of data we collect by more than an order of magnitude. But it is also now apparent that the message is much more complex than previously thought because many time, energy and neutrino flavor dependent features are imprinted upon the signal either at emission or by the passage through the outer layers of the star. These features arise due to the explosion dynamics, the physics of nuclei at high temperatures and densities, and the properties of neutrinos. In this proceedings I will present some aspects of the physics of supernova neutrino oscillations and what we should expect to observe when the neutrinos from the next Galactic supernova (eventually) arrive.
The progenitor systems for type Ia supernovae are still controversial. One of the methods to test the proposed scenario for the progenitor systems is to identify companions that are supposed to survive according to the so-called single degenerate scenario. These companions might be affected by supernova ejecta. We present several numerical simulations of surviving red-giant companions whose envelopes were stripped and heated. We find that red-giants with less-massive helium cores ($\lesssim0.30\,M_{\odot}$) can be so faint after the supernovae that we cannot detect them. In addition, we apply the results to the case of SNR 0509-67.5, and put constraints on the helium core mass, envelope stripping, and energy injection under the single degenerate scenario for type Ia supernovae.
Our arguments deal with the early evolution of Galactic globular clusters and show why only a few of the supernovae products were retained within globular clusters and only in the most massive cases ($M \ge 10^6$ Msol), while less massive clusters were not contaminated at all by supernovae. Here we show that supernova blast waves evolving in a steep density gradient undergo blowout and end up discharging their energy and metals into the medium surrounding the clusters. This inhibits the dispersal and the contamination of the gas left over from a first stellar generation. Only the ejecta from well centered supernovae, that evolve into a high density medium available for a second stellar generation in the most massive clusters would be retained. These are likely to mix their products with the remaining gas, leading in these cases eventually to an Fe contaminated second stellar generation.
Core-collapse supernovae are considered to be important contributors to the primitive dust enrichment of the interstellar medium in the high-redshift universe. Theoretical models of dust formation in stellar explosions have so far provided controversial results and a generally poor fit to the observations of dust formation in local supernovae. We present a new methodology for the calculation of carbonaceous dust formation in young supernova remnants. Our new technique uses both the nucleation theory and a chemical reaction network to allow us to compute the dust growth beyond the molecular level as well as to consider chemical erosion of the forming grains. We find that carbonaceous dust forms efficiently in the core of the ejecta, but takes several years to condensate, longer than previously estimated. It forms unevenly and remains concentrated in the inner part of the remnant. These results support the role of core-collapse supernovae as dust factories and provide new insight on the observations of SN 1987A, in which large amounts of dust have been detected to form on a timescale of years after core collapse.
The discovery of the most luminous supernova ASASSN-15lh triggered a shock-wave in the supernova community. The three possible mechanisms proposed for the majority of other superluminous supernovae do not produce a realistic physical model for this particular supernova. In the present study we show the limiting luminosity available from a nickel-powered pair-instability supernova. We computed a few exotic nickel-powered explosions with a total mass of nickel up to 1500 solar masses. We used the hydrostatic configurations prepared with the GENEVA and MESA codes, and the STELLA radiative-transfer code for following the explosion of these models. We show that 1500 solar masses of radioactive nickel is needed to power a luminosity of 2x10^45 erg/s. The resulting light curve is very broad and incompatible with the shorter ASASSN-15lh time-scale. This rules out a nickel-powered origin of ASASSN-15lh. In addition, we derive a simple peak luminosity - nickel mass relation from our data, which may serve to estimate of nickel mass from observed peak luminosities.
We study Earth matter effect in oscillation of supernovae neutrinos. We show that detecting Earth matter effect gives an independent measurement of spectra of supernovae neutrinos, i.e. the flavor difference of the spectra of supernovae neutrinos. We study the effect of energy resolution and angular resolution of final electron or positron on detecting the signal of Earth matter effect. We show that varying the widths of energy bins in analysis can change the signal strength of Earth matter effect and the statistical fluctuation. A reasonable choice of energy bins can both suppress the statistical fluctuation and make out a good signal strength relative to the statistical fluctuation. Neutrino detectors with good energy resolution and good angular resolution are therefore preferred so that there are more freedom to vary energy bins and to optimize the signal of Earth matter effect in analyzing events of supernovae neutrinos.
Single-year spikes in radiocarbon production are caused by intense bursts of radiation from space. Supernovae emit both high-energy particle and electromagnetic radiation, but it is the latter that is most likely to strike the atmosphere all at once and cause a surge in 14C production. In the 1990s, it was claimed that the supernova in 1006 CE produced exactly this effect. With the 14C spikes in the years 775 and 994 CE now attributed to extreme solar events, attention has returned to the question of whether historical supernovae are indeed detectable using annual 14C measurements. Here, we combine new and existing measurements over six documented and putative supernovae, and conclude that no such astrophysical event has yet left a distinct imprint on the past atmospheric 14C record.
The lunar geological record is expected to contain a rich record of the galactic environment of the Solar System, including records of nearby (i.e. less than a few tens of parsecs) supernova explosions. This record will be composed of two principal components: (i) cosmogenic nuclei produced within, as well as radiation damage to, surface materials caused by increases in the galactic cosmic ray flux resulting from nearby supernovae; and (ii) the direct collection of supernova ejecta, likely enriched in a range of unusual and diagnostic isotopes, on the lunar surface. Both aspects of this potentially very valuable astrophysical archive will be best preserved in currently buried, but nevertheless near-surface, layers that were directly exposed to the space environment at known times in the past and for known durations. Suitable geological formations certainly exist on the Moon, but accessing them will require a greatly expanded programme of lunar exploration.
Supernovae near the galactic center evolve differently from regular galactic supernovae. This is mainly due to the environment into which the supernova remnants propagate. Instead of a static, uniform density medium, SNRs near the galactic center propagate into a wind swept environment with a velocity away from the galactic center, and a graded density profile. This causes these SNRs to be non - spherical, and to evolve faster than their galactic counterparts. We develop an analytic theory for the evolution of explosions within a stellar wind, and verify it using a hydrodynamic code. We show that such explosions can evolve in one of three possible morphologies. Using these results we discuss the association between the two SNRs (SGR East and SGR A's bipolar radio/X-ray Lobes) and the two neutron stars (the cannonball and SGR J1745-2900) near the galactic center. We show that, given the morphologies of the SNR and positions of the neutron stars, the only possible association is between SGR A's bipolar radio/X-ray Lobes and SGR J1745-2900. The compact object created in the explosion of SGR East remains undetected, and the SNR of the supernova that created the cannonball has already disappeared.
In response to a recently reported observation of evidence for two classes of Type Ia Supernovae (SNe Ia) distinguished by their brightness in the rest-frame near ultraviolet (NUV), we search for the phenomenon in publicly available light-curve data. We use the SNANA supernova analysis package to simulate SN Ia-light curves in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey Supernova Search (SDSS) and the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS) with a model of two distinct ultraviolet classes of SNe Ia and a conventional model with a single broad distribution of SN-Ia ultraviolet brightnesses. We compare simulated distributions of rest-frame colors with these two models to those observed in 158 SNe Ia in the SDSS and SNLS data. The SNLS sample of 99 SNe Ia is in clearly better agreement with a model with one class of SN Ia light curves and shows no evidence for distinct NUV sub-classes. The SDSS sample of 59 SNe Ia with poorer color resolution does not distinguish between the two models.
Here are reviewed the insights from observations at optical and infrared wavelengths for low mass limits above which stars do not seem to end as luminous supernovae. These insights are: (1) the absence in archived images of nearby galaxies of stellar progenitors of core-collapse supernovae above 16-18 solar masses, (2) the identification of luminous-massive stars that quietly disappear without optically bright supernovae, (3) the absence in the nebular spectra of supernovae of type II-P of the nucleosynthetic products expected from progenitors above 20 solar masses, (4) the absence in color magnitude diagrams of stars in the environment of historic core-collapse supernovae of stars with >20 solar masses. From the results in these different areas of observational astrophysics, and the recently confirmed dependence of black hole formation on metallicity and redshift of progenitors, it is concluded that a large fraction of massive stellar binaries in the universe end as binary black holes.
Being a superluminous supernova (SLSN), PTF12dam can be explained by a $^{56}$Ni-powered model, a magnetar-powered model or an interaction model. We propose that PTF12dam is a pulsational pair instability supernova, where the outer envelope of a progenitor is ejected during the pulsations. Thus, it is powered by double energy source: radioactive decay of $^{56}$Ni and a radiative shock in a dense circumstellar medium. To describe multicolor light curves and spectra we use radiation hydrodynamics calculations of STELLA code. We found that light curves are well described in the model with 40M$_{\odot}$ ejecta and 20-40M$_{\odot}$ circumstellar medium. The ejected $^{56}$Ni mass is about 6M$_{\odot}$ which results from explosive nucleosynthesis with large explosion energy (2-3)$\cdot$10$^{52}$ ergs. In comparison with alternative scenarios of pair-instability supernova and magnetar-powered supernova, in interaction model all the observed main photometric characteristics are well reproduced: multicolor light curves, color temperatures, and photospheric velocities.
Under the assumption that jets explode core collapse supernovae in a negative jet feedback mechanism (JFM), I show that rapidly rotating neutron stars are likely to be formed when the explosion is very energetic. Under the assumption that an accretion disk or an accretion belt around the just-formed neutron star launch jets and that the accreted gas spins-up the just-formed neutron star, I derive a crude relation between the energy that is stored in the spinning neutron star and the explosion energy. This relation reads Espin/Eexp~(Eexp/1e52erg). It shows that within the frame of the JFM explosion model of core collapse supernovae, spinning neutron stars, such as magnetars, might have significant energy in super-energetic explosions. The existence of magnetars, if confirmed, such as in the recent super-energetic supernova GAIA16apd, further supports the call for a paradigm shift from neutrino-driven to jet-driven core-collapse supernova mechanisms.
We study the light curve of SN 1604 using the historical data collected at the time of observation of the outburst. Comparing the supernova with recent SNe Ia of various rates of decline after maximum light, we find that this event looks like a normal SNIa (stretch s close to 0.9: 0.9 \pm 0.13), a fact which is also favoured by the late light curve. The supernova is heavily obscured by 2.7 \pm 0.1 magnitudes in V. We obtain an estimate of the distance to the explosion with a value of d = 5 \pm 0.7 kpc. This can help to settle ongoing discussions on the distance to the supernova. It also shows that this supernova is of the same kind as those of the SNIa sets that we use for cosmology nowadays.
It has become clear during the last decades that the interaction between the supernova ejecta and the circumstellar medium is playing a major role both for the observational properties of the supernova and for understanding the evolution of the progenitor star leading up to the explosion. In addition, it provides an opportunity to understand the shock physics connected to both thermal and non-thermal processes, including relativistic particle acceleration, radiation processes and the hydrodynamics of shock waves. This chapter has an emphasis on the information we can get from radio and X-ray observations, but also their connection to observations in the optical and ultraviolet. We first review the different physical processes involved in circumstellar interaction, including hydrodynamics, thermal X-ray emission, acceleration of relativistic particles and non-emission processes in the radio and X-ray ranges. Finally, we discuss applications of these to different types of supernovae.
Supernova 2011kl, associated with the ultra-long gamma-ray burst (ULGRB) 111209A, exhibited a higher-than-normal peak luminosity, placing it in the parameter space between regular supernovae and super-luminous supernovae. Its light curve can only be matched by an abnormally high fraction of $^{56}$Ni that appears inconsistent with the observed spectrum, and as a result it has been suggested that the supernova, and by extension the gamma-ray burst, are powered by the spin-down of a highly magnetised millisecond pulsar, known as a magnetar. We investigate the broadband observations of ULGRB 111209A, and find two independent measures that suggest a high density circumburst environment. However, the light curve of the GRB afterglow shows no evidence of a jet break (the steep decline that would be expected as the jet slows due to the resistance of the external medium) out to three weeks after trigger, implying a wide jet. Combined with the high isotropic energy of the burst, this implies that only a magnetar with a spin period of ~ 1 ms or faster can provide enough energy to power both ULGRB 111209A and Supernova 2011kl.
The explosion mechanism of core-collapse supernovae is a long-standing problem in stellar astrophysics. We briefly outline the main contenders for a solution and review recent efforts to model core-collapse supernova explosions by means of multi-dimensional simulations. We discuss several suggestions for solving the problem of missing or delayed neutrino-driven explosions in three-dimensional supernova models, including -- among others -- variations in the microphysics and large seed perturbations in convective burning shells. Focusing on the neutrino-driven mechanism, we summarise currents efforts to predict supernova explosion and remnant properties based on first-principle models and on more phenomenological approaches.
We have used effective reaction rates (ERR) for the helium burning reactions to predict the yield of the gamma-emitting nuclei 26Al, 44Ti, and 60Fe in core col- lapse supernovae. The variations in the predicted yields for values of the reaction rates allowed by the ERR are much smaller than obtained previously, and smaller than other uncertainties. A "filter" for supernova nucleosynthesis yields based on pre-supernova structure was used to estimate the effect of failed supernovae on the initial mass function-averaged yields; this substantially reduced the yields of all these isotopes, but the predicted yield ratio 60Fe/26Al was little affected. The robustness of this ratio is promising for comparison with data, but it is larger than observed in nature; possible causes for this discrepancy are discussed.
Observations of radio supernovae often exhibit characteristics not readily accounted for by a homogeneous, spherically symmetric synchrotron model; e.g., flat-topped spectra/lightcurves. It is shown that many of these deviations from the standard model can be attributed to an inhomogeneous source structure. It is argued that the radio emission in Type Ib/c supernovae has a small volume filling factor and comes from a narrow region associated with the forward shock, while the radio emission region in SN 1993J (Type IIb) is determined by the extent of the Rayleigh-Taylor instability emanating from the contact discontinuity. Attention is also drawn to the similarities between radio supernovae and the structural properties of supernova remnants.
Gamma ray lines are expected to be emitted as part of the afterglow of supernova explosions, because radioactive decay of freshly synthesised nuclei occurs. Significant radioactive gamma ray line emission is expected from 56Ni and 44Ti decay on time scales of the initial explosion (56Ni, tau~days) and the young supernova remnant (44Ti,tau~90 years). Less specific, and rather informative for the supernova population as a whole, are lessons from longer lived isotopes such as 26Al and 60Fe. From isotopes of elements heavier than iron group elements, any interesting gamma-ray line emission is too faint to be observable. Measurements with space-based gamma-ray telescopes have obtained interesting gamma ray line emissions from two core collapse events, Cas A and SN1987A, and one thermonuclear event, SN2014J. We discuss INTEGRAL data from all above isotopes, including all line and continuum signatures from these two objects, and the surveys for more supernovae, that have been performed by gamma ray spectrometry. Our objective here is to illustrate what can be learned from gamma-ray line emission properties about the explosions and their astrophysics.
We investigate the properties of Type IIP supernovae that are dominantly powered by the rotational kinetic energy of the newly born neutron star. While the spin-down of a magnetar has previously been proposed as a viable energy source in the context of super-luminous supernovae, we show that a similar mechanism could produce both normal and peculiar Type IIP supernova light curves from red supergiant progenitors for a range of initial spin periods and equivalent dipole magnetic field strengths. Although the formation channel for such magnetars in a typical red supergiant progenitor is unknown, it is tantalizing that this proof of concept model is capable of producing ordinary Type IIP lightcurve properties, perhaps implying that rotation rate and magnetic field strength may play important roles in some ordinary looking Type IIP supernova explosions.
Objects of known brightness, like Type Ia supernovae (SNIa), can be used to measure distances. If a massive object warps spacetime to form multiple images of a background SNIa, a direct test of cosmic expansion is also possible. However, these lensing events must first be distinguished from other rare phenomena. Recently, a supernova was found to shine much brighter than normal for its distance, which resulted in a debate: was it a new type of superluminous supernova or a normal SNIa magnified by a hidden gravitational lens? Here we report that a spectrum obtained after the supernova faded away shows the presence of a foreground galaxy--the first found to strongly magnify a SNIa. We discuss how more lensed SNIa may be found than previously predicted.
A light hidden gauge boson with kinetic mixing with the usual photon is a popular setup in theories of dark matter. The supernova cooling via radiating the hidden boson is known to put an important constraint on the mixing. I consider the possible role dark matter, which under reasonable assumptions naturally exists inside supernova, can play in the cooling picture. Because the interaction between the hidden gauge boson and DM is likely unsuppressed, even a small number of dark matter compared to protons inside the supernova could dramatically shorten the free streaming length of the hidden boson. A picture of a dark matter "smog" inside the supernova, which substantially relaxes the cooling constraint, is discussed in detail.
The nature of the supernova leading to the Crab Nebula has long been controversial because of the low energy that is present in the observed nebula. One possibility is that there is significant energy in extended fast material around the Crab but searches for such material have not led to detections. An electron capture supernova model can plausibly account for the low energy and the observed abundances in the Crab. Here, we examine the evolution of the Crab pulsar wind nebula inside a freely expanding supernova and find that the observed properties are most consistent with a low energy event. Both the velocity and radius of the shell material, and the amount of gas swept up by the pulsar wind point to a low explosion energy ($\sim 10^{50}$ ergs). We do not favor a model in which circumstellar interaction powers the supernova luminosity near maximum light because the required mass would limit the freely expanding ejecta.
In previous work [Amendola {\it et al.}, Phys. Rev. D86 (2012) 063515], Principal Component Analysis based methods to constrain the dark energy equation of state using Type Ia supernovae and other low redshift probes were extended to spectroscopic tests of the stability fundamental couplings, which can probe higher redshifts. Here we use them to quantify the gains in sensitivity obtained by combining spectroscopic measurements expected from ESPRESSO at the VLT and the high-resolution ultra-stable spectrograph for the E-ELT (known as ELT-HIRES) with future supernova surveys. In addition to simulated low and intermediate redshift supernova surveys, we assess the dark energy impact of high-redshift supernovas detected by JWST and characterized by the E-ELT or TMT. Our results show that a detailed characterization of the dark energy properties beyond the acceleration phase (i.e., deep in the matter era) is viable, and may reach as deep as redshift 4.
In this article the role of the supersaturation density equation of state (EOS) is explored in simulations of failed core-collapse supernova explosions. Therefore the nuclear EOS is extended via a one-parameter excluded volume description for baryons, taking into account their finite and increasing volume with increasing density in excess of saturation density. Parameters are selected such that the resulting supernova EOS represent extreme cases, with high pressure variations at supersaturation density which feature extreme stiff and soft EOS variants of the reference case, i.e. without excluded volume corrections. Unlike in the interior of neutron stars with central densities in excess of several times saturation density, central densities of core-collapse supernovae reach only slightly above saturation density. Hence, the impact of the supersaturation density EOS on the supernova dynamics as well as the neutrino signal is found to be negligible. It is mainly determined from the low- and intermediate-density domain, which is left unmodified within this generalized excluded volume approach.
We explore when supernovae can (and cannot) regulate the star formation and bulge growth in galaxies based on a sample of 18 simulated galaxies. The simulations include key physics such as evaporation and conduction, neglected in prior work, and required to correctly model superbubbles resulting from stellar feedback. We show that for galaxies with virial masses $>10^{12}\;M_\odot$, supernovae alone cannot prevent excessive star formation. This failure occurs due to a shutdown of galactic winds, with wind mass loadings falling from $\eta\sim10$ to $\eta<1$. In more massive systems, this transfer of baryons to the circumgalactic medium falters earlier on and the galaxies diverge significantly from observed galaxy scaling relations and morphologies. The decreasing efficiency is simply due to a deepening potential well preventing gas escape. This implies that non-supernova feedback mechanisms must become dominant for galaxies with stellar masses greater than $\sim4\times10^{10}\;M_\odot$. The runaway growth of the central stellar bulge, strongly linked to black hole growth, suggests that feedback from active galactic nuclei is the probable mechanism. Below this mass, supernovae alone are able to produce a realistic stellar mass fraction, star formation history and disc morphology.
It has been recently pointed out that neutrino fluxes from a supernova can show substantial flavor conversions almost immediately above the core. Using linear stability analyses and numerical solutions of the fully nonlinear equations of motion, we perform a detailed study of these fast conversions, focussing on the region just above the supernova core. We carefully specify the instabilities for evolution in space or time, andfind that neutrinos travelling towards the core make fast conversions more generic, i.e., possible for a wider range of flux ratios and angular asymmetries that produce a crossing between the zenith-angle spectra of $\nu_e$ and ${\bar\nu_e}$. Using fluxes and angular distributions predicted by supernova simulations, we find that fast conversions can occur within tens of nanoseconds, only a few meters away from the putative neutrinospheres. If these fast flavor conversions indeed take place, they would have important implications for the supernova explosion mechanism and nucleosynthesis.
Are some neutron stars produced without a supernova, without ejecting mass in a remnant? Theoretical calculations of core collapse in massive stars often predict this. The observation of the repeating FRB 121102, whose dispersion measure has not changed over several years, suggests that dark core collapses are not just failures of computer codes, but may be real. The existence of one repeating FRB with unchanging dispersion measure is not conclusive, but within a decade hundreds or thousands of FRB are expected to be discovered, likely including scores of repeaters, permitting useful statistical inferences. A na\"{\i}ve supernova remnant model predicts observable decline in dispersion measure for 100 years after its formation. If an upper limit on the decline of 2 pc/cm$^3$-y is set for five repeating FRB, then the na\"{\i}ve model with nominal parameters is rejected at the 95\% level of confidence. This may indicate dark neutron star formation without a supernova or supernova remnant. This hypothesis may also be tested with LSST data that would show, if present, a supernova at an interferometric FRB position if it occurred within the LSST epoch.
Core-collapse supernovae are one of the most energetic events in the universe ($10^{46} J$). When a massive star (M $>$ 8 M$_{\odot}$) ignites its last fusion stage where silicon fusion makes iron, its end is then very close. Basically, the core of the star falls inwardly and the gravitational energy is then released in a supernova explosion. The basic picture of this explosion was confirmed by the few neutrinos detected from the SN1987a supernova at Kamiokande, IMB and Baksan detectors. However, there are many details that are still unknown. Since then, a large detector network has grown with better capabilities. Nowadays, in the case of a supernova explosion in our galaxy, the information that we would acquire would allow us to learn much more about these energetic events and constrain our models. Here, I present a brief summary of this network with special emphasis in SuperK-Gd (the upgraded Super-Kamiokande detector with efficient neutron tagging).
Supernova remnants are often presented as the most probable sources of Galactic cosmic rays. This idea is supported by the accumulation of evidence that particle acceleration is happening at supernova remnant shocks. Observations in the TeV range have especially contributed to increase the understanding of the mechanisms, but many aspects of the particle acceleration at supernova remnant shocks are still debated. The Cherenkov telescope array is expected to lead to the detection of many new supernova remnants in the TeV and multi-TeV range. In addition to the individual study of each, the study of these objects as a population can help constrain the parameters describing the acceleration of particles and increase our understanding of the mechanisms involved.
Recent theoretical models suggest that young supernovae might be able to accelerate particles, which in turn might generate very high energy gamma-ray emission. We search for gamma-ray emission towards supernovae in nearby galaxies which were serendipitously within the field of view of the High Energy Stereoscopic System (H.E.S.S.) within a year of the supernova event. H.E.S.S. data collected between December 2003 and March 2015 were considered and compared to recent catalogs. Nine candidate supernovae were identified and analyzed. No significant emission from these objects has been found. Gamma-ray emission upper limits, which are of the order $\sim$10$^{-13}$ cm$^{-2}$s$^{-1}$ above 1 TeV, are reported.
The next galactic core-collapse supernova will deliver a wealth of neutrinos which for the first time we are well-situated to measure. These explosions produce neutrinos with energies between 10 and 100 MeV over a period of tens of seconds. Galactic supernovae are relatively rare events, occurring with a frequency of just a few per century. It is therefore essential that all neutrino detectors capable of detecting these neutrinos are ready to trigger on this signal when it occurs. This poster describes a data-driven trigger which is designed to detect the neutrino signal from a galactic core-collapse supernova with the NOvA detectors. The trigger analyzes 5ms blocks of detector activity and applies background rejection algorithms to detect the signal time structure over the background. This background reduction is an essential part of the process, as the NOvA detectors are designed to detect neutrinos from Fermilab's NuMI beam which have an average energy of 2GeV--well above the average energy of supernova neutrinos.
We propose a common envelope jets supernova scenario for the enigmatic supernova iPTF14hls where a neutron star that spirals-in inside the envelope of a massive giant star accretes mass and launches jets that power the ejection of the circumstellar shell and a few weeks later the explosion itself. To account for the kinetic energy of the circumstellar gas and the explosion, the neutron star should accrete a mass of approximately 0.3 solar masses. The tens of solar masses of circumstellar gas that accounts for some absorption lines is ejected while the neutron star orbits for about one to several weeks inside the envelope of the giant star. In the last hours of the interaction the neutron star merges with the core, accretes mass, and launches jets that eject the core and the inner envelope to form the explosion itself and the medium where the supernova photosphere resides. The remaining neutron star accretes fallback gas and further powers the supernova. We attribute the 1954 pre-explosion outburst to an eccentric orbit and temporary mass accretion by the neutron star at periastron passage prior to the onset of the common envelope phase.
In this review article we discuss selected developments regarding the role of the equation of state (EOS) in simulations of core-collapse supernovae. There are no first-principle calculations of the state of matter under supernova conditions since a wide range of conditions is covered, in terms of density, temperature and isospin asymmetry. Instead, model EOS are commonly employed in supernova studies. These can be divided into regimes with intrinsically different degrees of freedom: heavy nuclei at low temperatures, inhomogeneous nuclear matter where light and heavy nuclei coexist together with unbound nucleons, and the transition to homogeneous matter at high densities and temperatures. In this article we discuss each of these phases with particular view on their role in supernova simulations.
Type Ia supernovae have light curves that have widths and magnitudes that can be used for testing cosmologies and they provide one of the few direct measurements of time dilation. It is shown that the standard analysis that calibrates the light curve against a rest-frame average (such as SALT2) removes all the cosmological information from the calibrated light curves. Consequently type Ia supernovae calibrated with these methods cannot be used to investigate cosmology. The major evidence that supports the hypothesis of a static universe is that the measurements of the widths of the raw light curves of type Ia supernovae do not show any time dilation. The intrinsic wavelength dependence shown by the SALT2 calibration templates is also consistent with no time dilation. Using a static cosmological model the peak absolute magnitudes of raw type Ia supernovae observations are also independent of redshift. These results support the hypothesis of a static universe.
Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are luminous and violent phenomena in the universe. Traditionally, long GRBs are expected to be produced by the collapse of massive stars and associated with supernovae. However, some low-redshift long GRBs have no detection of supernova association, such as GRBs 060505, 060614 and 111005A. It is hard to classify these events convincingly according to usual classifications, and the lack of the supernova implies a non-massive star origin. We propose a new path to produce long GRBs without supernova association, the unstable and extremely violent accretion in a contact binary system consisting of a stellar-mass black hole and a white dwarf, which fills an important gap in compact binary evolution.
What makes a supernova truly `peculiar?' In this chapter we attempt to address this question by tracing the history of the use of `peculiar' as a descriptor of non-standard supernovae back to the original binary spectroscopic classification of Type I vs. Type II proposed by Minkowski (1941). A handful of noteworthy examples (including SN 2012au, SN 2014C, iPTF14hls, and iPTF15eqv) are highlighted to illustrate a general theme: classes of supernovae that were once thought to be peculiar are later seen as logical branches of standard events. This is not always the case, however, and we discuss ASASSN-15lh as an example of a transient with an origin that remains contentious. We remark on how late-time observations at all wavelengths (radio-through-X-ray) that probe 1) the kinematic and chemical properties of the supernova ejecta and 2) the progenitor star system's mass loss in the terminal phases preceding the explosion, have often been critical in understanding the nature of seemingly unusual events.
Ton-scale direct dark matter search experiments should be sensitive to neutrino-induced recoil events from either $^8$B solar neutrinos or the brief but intense flux from a core collapse supernova in the Milky Way. These low-threshold detectors are sensitive to the very low recoil energies, of order 10 keV, deposited via coherent elastic scatters between supernova neutrinos and target nuclei. Large superheated fluid detectors like PICO-500, a bubble chamber to be initially filled with an active target of 1 t of C$_3$F$_8$, should see multiple-bubble events from CE$\nu$NS if the detector is live during a neutrino burst from a supernova at a distance up to 10 kpc. This paper discusses conditions under which bubble chambers could be used as an independent measurement in the event of a supernova similar to SN 1987A, with particular sensitivity to the currently less-constrained heavy-lepton $\nu_x$ channel.
Motivated by recent observations suggesting that core-collapse supernovae may on average produce ~0.3 M_sun of dust, we explore a simple dust production scenario which applies to star-forming galaxies in the local environment (the Magellanic Clouds and possibly the Milky Way) as well as to high redshift (sub- millimeter, QSO, Lyman break) galaxies. We assume that the net dust destruction (due to supernova reverse shock, shocks in the interstellar medium, or astration) is negligible on a timescale of 1 Gyr, in which case the dust mass can be estimated as 0.004 times the star-formation rate (for a Chabrier IMF) multiplied by the duration of the star-formation episode. The model can account for observed dust masses over four orders of magnitude and across the redshift range 0-8.4, with dust production rates spanning five orders of magnitudes. This suggests that star-forming galaxies may be seen as maximally dusty, in the sense that a dominant fraction of the dust-forming elements forged in a supernova eventually will go into the solid phase. In turn, this indicates little destruction of supernova dust or almost complete replenishment, on a short time scale, of any dust that is destroyed.
We present substantial extensions to the Monte Carlo radiative transfer code TARDIS to perform spectral synthesis for type II supernovae. By incorporating a non-LTE ionization and excitation treatment for hydrogen, a full account of free-free and bound-free processes, a self-consistent determination of the thermal state and by improving the handling of relativistic effects, the improved code version includes the necessary physics to perform spectral synthesis for type II supernovae to high precision as required for the reliable inference of supernova properties. We demonstrate the capabilities of the extended version of TARDIS by calculating synthetic spectra for the prototypical type II supernova SN1999em and by deriving a new and independent set of dilution factors for the expanding photosphere method. We have investigated in detail the dependence of the dilution factors on photospheric properties and, for the first time, on changes in metallicity. We also compare our results with two previously published sets of dilution factors by Eastman et al. (1996) and by Dessart & Hillier (2005), and discuss the potential sources of the discrepancies between studies.
Cosmologists are facing the problem of the analysis of a huge quantity of data when observing the sky. The methods used in cosmology are, for the most of them, relying on astrophysical models, and thus, for the classification, they usually use a machine learning approach in two-steps, which consists in, first, extracting features, and second, using a classifier. In this paper, we are specifically studying the supernovae phenomenon and especially the binary classification "I.a supernovae versus not-I.a supernovae". We present two Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) defeating the current state-of-the-art. The first one is adapted to time series and thus to the treatment of supernovae light-curves. The second one is based on a Siamese CNN and is suited to the nature of data, i.e. their sparsity and their weak quantity (small learning database).
The distance to the fireworks galaxy NGC 6946 is highly uncertain. Recent distance estimates using the tip of the red giant branch of 7.7 to 7.8 Mpc are larger than the distance commonly assumed for studying supernovae in this galaxy of 5.9 Mpc. Here we use the high supernova rate of the galaxy to derive the star-formation rate and predict the galaxy's FUV flux. We also account for dust extinction by different methods to derive a distance of 7.9+/-4.0 Mpc for NGC 6946. We then use the new distance to re-evaluate the understanding of the supernova progenitors 2002hh, 2004et, 2017eaw, the possible electron capture event 2008S and the possible black-hole forming event N6946-BH1. For the latter two exotic events the new distance improves the consistency between the observed progenitors and the stellar models that give rise to these events. From our findings we strongly recommend that all future studies of NGC~6946 must use the greater distance to the galaxy of 7.72+/-0.32 Mpc of Anand et al. (2018).
Brief (less than 100 years) rapid-increase anomalies in the Earth's atmospheric radiocarbon production have previously been attributed to either gamma photon radiation from supernovae or to cosmic ray particle radiation from exceptionally large solar flares. Analysis of distances and ages of nearby supernovae remnants, the probable gamma emissions, the predicted Earth incident radiation, and the terrestrial radiocarbon record indicates that supernova causation may be the case. Supernovae include Type Ia white dwarf explosions, Type Ib, c, and II core collapse events, and some types of gamma burst objects. All generate significant pulses of atmospheric radiocarbon depending on distances. Surveys of supernova remnants offer a nearly complete accounting for the past 50,000 years. There are 18 events less than or at 1.4 kilo-parsec distance, and brief radiocarbon anomalies with appropriate sizes occurred for each of the closest events. In calendar years before 1950, these are: Vela, 22 per mil del 14C at 12,760; S165, 20 per mil at 7431; Vela Junior, 13 per mil at 2765; HB9, 9 per mil at 5372; Boomerang, 11 per mil at 10,255; and Cygnus Loop (per mil change not calculated) at 14,722. Although uncertainties remain large, the agreements of prediction to observation support a possible causal connection.
With myriads of detection events from a prospective Galactic core-collapse supernova, current and future neutrino detectors will be able to sample detailed, time-dependent neutrino fluxes and spectra. This offers enormous possibilities for inferring supernova physics from the various phases of the neutrino signal from the neutronization burst through the accretion and early explosion phase to the cooling phase. The signal will constrain the time evolution of bulk parameters of the young proto-neutron star like its mass and radius as well as the structure of the progenitor, probe multi-dimensional phenomena in the supernova core, and constrain thedynamics of the early explosion phase. Aside from further astrophysical implications, supernova neutrinos may also shed further light on the properties of matter at supranuclear densities and on open problems in particle physics.
A newborn magnetar enclosed in a young supernova is thought to produce a luminous optical transit by tapping most of its spinning-down energy into radiation. Luminosity from the magnetar snowplows its surrounding gas and creates an expanding shell. This shell is subject to fluid instabilities and forms a big density spike that has been found in previous 1D models. Recently, multidimensional simulations suggest that the 1D density spike truncated into fragmentary structures, implying that strong fluid instabilities frequently occur inside magnetar-powered supernovae. We present a high-resolution 3D hydrodynamics simulation in $4\pi$ geometry of a magnetar-powered supernova of a 6 Msun carbon-oxygen star. We find the shell is subject to strong fluid instabilities and that turbulent gas forms inside it. Because an extensive circumstellar medium formed before the star exploded, reverse-shock driven fluid instabilities cause additional mixing from the outer part of the ejecta. These two different mixing mechanisms together break down the spherical symmetry of the supernova ejecta. The resulting mixing of chemical elements are reflected in its spectral observation and polarized features because of the asymmetry of the ejecta.
Dark matter direct detection experiments have poor sensitivity to a galactic population of dark matter with mass below the GeV scale. However, such dark matter can be produced copiously in supernovae. Since this thermally-produced population is much hotter than the galactic dark matter, it can be observed with direct detection experiments. In this paper, we focus on a dark sector with fermion dark matter and a heavy dark photon as a specific example. We first extend existing supernova cooling constraints on this model to the regime of strong coupling where the dark matter becomes diffusively trapped in the supernova. Then, using the fact that even outside these cooling constraints the diffuse galactic flux of these dark sector particles can still be large, we show that this flux is detectable in direct detection experiments such as current and next-generation liquid xenon detectors. As a result, due to supernova production, light dark matter has the potential to be discovered over many orders of magnitude of mass and coupling.
We revisit the rates of neutrino pair emission and absorption from nucleon-nucleon bremsstrahlung in supernova matter using the $T$-matrix formalism in the long-wavelength limit. Based on two-body potentials of chiral effective field theory ($\chi$EFT), we solve the Lippmann-Schwinger equation for the $T$-matrix including non-diagonal contributions. We consider final-state Pauli blocking and hence our calculations are valid for nucleons with an arbitrary degree of degeneracy. We also explore the in-medium effects on the $T$-matrix and find that they are relatively small for supernova matter. We compare our results with one-pion exchange rates, commonly used in supernova simulations, and calculations using an effective on-shell diagonal $T$-matrix from measured phase shifts. We estimate that multiple-scattering effects and correlations due to the random phase approximation introduce small corrections on top of the $T$-matrix results at subsaturation densities. A numerical table of the structure function is provided that can be used in supernova simulations.
Core-collapse supernovae presumably explode because trapped neutrinos push the material out of the stellar envelope. This process is directly controlled by the weak scale $v$: we argue that supernova explosions happen only if fundamental constants are tuned within a factor of few as $v \sim \Lambda_{\rm QCD}^{3/4} M_{\rm Pl}^{1/4}$, such that neutrinos are trapped in supernovae for a time comparable to the gravitational time-scale. We provide analytic arguments and simulations in spherical approximation, that need to be validated by more comprehensive simulations. The above result can be important for fundamental physics, because core-collapse supernova explosions seem anthropically needed, as they spread intermediate-mass nuclei presumably necessary for `life'. We also study stellar burning, finding that it does not provide anthropic boundaries on $v$.
Neutrinos produced in the hot and dense interior of the next galactic supernova would be visible at dark matter experiments in coherent elastic nuclear recoils. While studies on this channel have focused on successful core-collapse supernovae, a thermonuclear (Type Ia) explosion, or a core-collapse that fails to explode and forms a black hole, are as likely to occur as the next galactic supernova event. I show that generation-3 noble liquid-based dark matter experiments such as DARWIN and ARGO, operating at sub-keV thresholds with ionization-only signals, would distinguish between (a) leading hypotheses of Type Ia explosion mechanisms by detecting an $\mathcal{O}$(1) s burst of $\mathcal{O}$(1) MeV neutrinos, and (b) progenitor models of failed supernovae by detecting an $\mathcal{O}$(1) s burst of $\mathcal{O}$(10) MeV neutrinos, especially by marking the instant of black hole formation from abrupt stoppage of neutrino detection. This detection is sensitive to all neutrino flavors and insensitive to neutrino oscillations, thereby making measurements complementary to neutrino experiments.
Far-Ultraviolet (FUV) radiation greatly exceeds ultraviolet, supernovae and winds in the energy budget of young star clusters but is poorly modelled in galaxy simulations. We present results of the first full isolated galaxy disk simulations to include FUV radiation self-consistently. This is the first science application of the TREVR radiative transfer algorithm. We find that FUV radiation alone cannot regulate star formation. However, FUV radiation is crucial for producing warm neutral gas. FUV is also a long-range feedback and is more important in the outer disks of galaxies. We also use the super-bubble feedback model, which depends only on the supernova energy per stellar mass, is more physically realistic than common, parameter-driven alternatives and thus better constrains supernova feedback impacts. FUV and supernovae together can regulate star formation, reproducing the tight Kennicutt-Schmidt relation observed for an individual galaxy, without producing too much hot ionized medium and with less disruption to the ISM compared to supernovae alone.
We perform a series of two-dimensional radiation-hydrodynamic simulations of the collision between supernova ejecta and circumstellar media (CSM). The hydrodynamic interaction of a fast flow and the surrounding media efficiently dissipates the kinetic energy of the fast flow and considered as a dominant energy source for a specific class of core-collapse supernovae. Despite some observational evidence for aspherical ejecta and/or CSM structure, multi-dimensional effects in the ejecta-CSM interaction are relatively unexplored. Our numerical simulations equipped with an adaptive mesh refinement technique successfully reproduce hydrodynamic instabilities developing around the ejecta-CSM interface. We also investigate effects of disk-like CSM on the dynamical evolution of supernova ejecta and bolometric light curves. We find that emission powered by ejecta-disk interaction exhibits significant viewing angle dependence. For a line of sight close to the symmetry axis, the observer directly sees the supernova ejecta, leading to a short brightening timescale. For an observer seeing the emission through the CSM disk, thermal photons diffuse throughout the CSM and thus the light curve is severely smeared out.
We construct a numerical light curve model for interaction-powered supernovae that arise from an interaction between the ejecta and the circumstellar matter (CSM). In order to resolve the shocked region of an interaction-powered supernova, we solve the fluid equations and radiative transfer equation assuming the steady states in the rest frames of the reverse and forward shocks at each time step. Then we numerically solve the radiative transfer equation and the energy equation in the CSM with the thus obtained radiative flux from the forward shock as a radiation source. We also compare results of our models with observational data of two supernovae 2005kj and 2005ip classified as type IIn and discuss the validity of our assumptions. We conclude that our model can predict physical parameters associated with supernova ejecta and the CSM from the observed features of the light curve as long as the CSM is sufficiently dense. Furthermore, we found that the absorption of radiation in the CSM is an important factor to calculate the luminosity.
The contribution to the local cosmic-ray flux from the Geminga supernova is calculated assuming shock acceleration to 10^14 eV in a remnant which was formed several 10^5 years ago along with the Geminga pulsar. The particles are propagated to Earth using a simple diffusion model. In the region below the knee in the spectrum, it is found the supernova may contribute 10% of the local cosmic-ray flux, assuming plausible explosion parameters. The contribution to the amplitude of the anisotropy is not in conflict with the data in this energy region.
The revised version of the widely circulated preprint ``Neutrino Flavor Evolution Near A Supernova's Core'' by J. Pantaleone (astro-ph 9405008 on the Bulletin Board, Indiana University preprint IUHET-276) is wrong. It contains two errors which lead to incorrect conclusions regarding neutrino flavor transformation in the supernova environment. In this short note we discuss these errors.
Extrapolation of perturbative nucleon spin fluctuation rates seems to suggest a strong suppression of weak interactions in supernova cores. We derive a new sum rule for the dynamical spin-density structure function which relates the spin fluctuation rate to the average nuclear interaction energy. For a bremsstrahlung like structure function profile we show that instead of strongly decreasing, the neutrino scattering cross section is roughly density independent and axion emission rates increase somewhat slower than the lowest order emissivities towards the center of a hot supernova core.
We report the negative results of our searches in COMPTEL data for 1.809 MeV gamma-ray line emission from four localized regions which contain nearby supernova remnants (SNRs). The upper flux limits (2 Sigma) are found to be in the range of 1.4*10e-5 to 2.4*10e-5 photons/s/cm/cm. These upper limits do not severely constrain the theoretical 26Al yields from individual core collapse supernovae due to large uncertainties in the SNR distances and the nature of the progenitor stars.
In a supernova (SN) core during infall and after collapse, neutrinos are trapped by their interactions with nucleons. For the axial-vector current interactions it is not enough to include static particle-particle correlations. Even the single-nucleon spin autocorrelation reduces the scattering cross section dramatically. Therefore, the dynamical structure of the spin-density structure function has an important impact on neutrino transport in supernovae. At the present time, SN neutrino opacities cannot be calculated to a controlled degree of precision.
In some luminous supersoft X-ray sources (SSSs), hydrogen accretes onto the surface of a white dwarf at rates more-or-less compatible with steady nuclear burning. The white dwarfs in these systems therefore have a good chance to grow in mass. Here we review what is known about the rate of Type Ia supernovae that may be associated with SSSs. Observable consequences of the conjecture that SSSs can be progenitors of Type Ia supernovae are also discussed.
A light pseudoscalar coupled to two photons would be copiously emitted by the core of a supernova and part of this flux would be converted to gamma-rays by the galactic magnetic field. Measurements on the SN1987A gamma-ray flux by the Gamma-Ray Spectrometer on the Solar Maximum Mission satellite imply stringents bounds on such process. The improved generation of satellite-borne detectors, like EGRET or the projegeneration of satellite-borne detectors, like EGRET or the project GLAST, could be able to detect a pseudoscalar-to-photon signal from a nearby supernova.
Presupernova evolution and explosive nucleosynthesis in massive stars for main-sequence masses from 13 $M_\odot$ to 70 $M_\odot$ are calculated. We examine the dependence of the supernova yields on the stellar mass, $^{12}C(\alpha, \gamma) ^{16}O}$ rate, and explosion energy. The supernova yields integrated over the initial mass function are compared with the solar abundances.
(abridged) - We present arcsecond resolution observations from the VLA of the satellite line of the hydroxyl molecule (OH) at 1720.53 MHz toward three Galactic supernova remnants: W28, W44 and IC443. All of our observations are consistent with a model in which the OH(1720 MHz) is collisionally excited by H2 molecules in the postshock gas heated by a non-dissociative shock. Supernova remnants with OH(1720 MHz) maser emission may be promising candidates to conduct high energy searches for the sites of cosmic ray acceleration.
Results of 2D numerical simulation of magnetorotational mechanism of supernova explosion are presented. It is shown that due to the differential rotation of the star toroidal component of magnetic field appears and grows with time. Angular momentum transfers outwards by the toroidal magnetic field. With the evolution of the process part of the envelope of the star is throwing away. The amount of thrown away mass and energy are estimated. The results of the simulation are qualitatively correspond to supernova explosion picture.
We present the results of three observations of shell-type supernova remnants observed by BeppoSAX. Two of the remnants (N132D and Cas A) are oxygen rich supernova remnants. They were observed during the PV phase. SN1006 was observed during A01. For SN1006 we present preliminary results on the abundance measurements based on the emission from the center of the remnant.
A parameterized supernova synthetic-spectrum code is used to study line identifications in the photospheric-phase spectra of the peculiar Type Ia SN 1991T, and to extract some constraints on the composition structure of the ejected matter. The inferred composition structure is not like that of any hydrodynamical model for Type Ia supernovae. Evidence that SN 1991T was overluminous for an SN Ia is presented, and it is suggested that this peculiar event probably was a substantially super-Chandrasekhar explosion that resulted from the merger of two white dwarfs.
We discuss some aspects concerning the formation and the impact of the first luminous structures in the universe (PopIIIs), with particular emphasis on their feedback effects on subsequent galaxy formation. We argue that supernovae in these objects might provide, if detected, important constraints for cosmological models. Some of these constraints come from the gravitational magnification of the supernova flux due to the intervening cosmological matter distribution which results in different predictions, for example, on rates, magnification probability, detection limits and number counts of distant supernovae. We show that NGST can tremendously contribute to such a study due to its advanced technological capabilities.
The paradigm that young neutron stars (NSs) evolve as rapidly rotating Crab-like pulsars requires re-examination. Evidence is accumulating that, in fact, many young NS are slowly rotating (P ~ 10-s) X-ray pulsars, lacking in detectable radio emission. We present new results on three radio-quiet NS candidates associated with supernova remnants, which suggests that alternative evolutionary-paths exist for young pulsars. These include the 12-s pulsator in Kes 73, the 7-s pulsar near Kes 75, and the enigmatic X-ray source in RCW 103. We postulate that such objects account for the apparent paucity of radio pulsars in supernova remnants.
Models for Type Ia Supernovae (SNe Ia) are reviewed. It is shown that there are strong reasons to believe that SNe Ia represent thermonuclear disruptions of C-O white dwarfs, when these white dwarfs reach the Chandrasekhar limit and ignite carbon at their centers.   Progenitor scenarios are reviewed critically and the strengths and weaknesses of each scenario are explicitly presented. It is argued that single-degenerate models, in which the white dwarf accretes from a subgiant or giant companion are currently favored. The relation of the different models to the use of SNe Ia for the determination of cosmological parameters is also discussed.   Observational tests of the conclusions are suggested.
We compare model calculations with observations of supernovae at late times to infer the time evolution of temperature, ionization and line emission. Here we mainly report on our results from our modeling of SN 1987A. We discuss the oxygen mass from the modeling of line fluxes. Line profiles show the distribution of the elements and the importance of including time dependence in the calculations. We discuss different approaches to determine the 44Ti-mass.
Core collapse supernovae are dominated by energy transport from neutrinos. Therefore, some supernova properties could depend on symetries and features of the standard model weak interactions. The cross section for neutrino capture is larger than that for antineutrino capture by one term of order the neutrino energy over the nucleon mass. This reduces the ratio of neutrons to protons in the $\nu$-driven wind above a protoneutron star by approximately 20 % and may significantly hinder r-process nucleosynthesis.
We discuss the cosmic history of supernovae on the basis of various assumptions and recent data on the star formation history.   We show that supernova rates as a function of redshift can be used to place significant constraints on progenitor models, on the star formation history, and on the importance of dust obscuration.   We demonstrate that it is unlikely that the current observational indications for the existence of a cosmological constant are merely an artifact of the dominance of different progenitor classes at different redshift intervals.
When gamma-rays emerge from a central source they may undergo Compton scattering in surrounding matter. The resulting Compton-scattered electrons radiate. Coherent radiation by such Compton electrons follows nuclear explosions above the Earth's atmosphere. Particle acceleration in instabilities produced by Compton electron currents may explain the radio emission by SN1998bw. Bounds on coherent radiation are suggested for supernovae and gamma-ray bursts; these bounds are very high, but it is unknown if coherent radiation occurs in these objects.
URCA neutrino reemission processes under the conditions in the mantle of a supernova with a strong toroidal magnetic field are investigated. It is shown that parity violation in these processes can be manifested macroscopically as a torque that rapidly spins up the region of the mantle occupied by such a field. Neutrino spin-up of the mantle can strongly affect the mechanism of further generation of the toroidal field, specifically, it can enhance the field in a small neighborhood of the rigid-body-rotating core of the supernova remnant.
World-wide, several detectors currently running or nearing completion are sensitive to a prompt core collapse supernova neutrino signal in the Galaxy. The SNEWS system will be able to provide a robust early warning of a supernova's occurrence to the astronomical community using a coincidence of neutrino signals around the world. This talk describes the nature of the neutrino signal, detection techniques and the motivation for a coincidence alert. It describes the implementation of SNEWS, its current status, and its future, which can include gravitational wave detectors.
We suggest Nova Sco 1994 (GRO 1655-40) as a possible relic of a Gamma Ray Burster (GRB) and Type Ib supernova (SN) explosion, showing that there is evidence both that the black hole was spun up by accretion and that there was a supernova explosion. We use the disc energy delivered from the rotational energy of the black hole to power the SN, and give arguments that roughly equal energy goes into the GRB and into the accretion disc to power the supernova.
We report here the current status of the Lick Observatory Supernova Search (LOSS) with the Katman Automatic Imaging Telescope (KAIT). The progress on both the hardware and the software of the system is described, and we present a list of recent discoveries. LOSS is the world' most successful search engine for nearby supernovae.
Most of middle-aged supernova remnants (SNRs) have a distorted and complicated appearance which cannot be explained in the framework of the Sedov-Taylor model. We consider three typical examples of such SNRs (Vela SNR, MSH 15-52, G 309.2-00.6) and show that their structure could be explained as a result of interaction of a supernova (SN) blast wave with the ambient medium preprocessed by the action of the SN progenitor's wind and ionized emission.
We propose that a gamma-ray burst in one member of a binary may induce a supernova-like explosion of a close, white-dwarf companion. Such an explosion might be brought about in rather light companions, which cannot undergo the standard accretion-induced explosion. This would give some GRB-associated supernova an appearance rather unlike that of the typical Type I. GRB 980425, if indeed associated with SN 1998bw, is too weak to have produced it through our proposed mechanism.
Ultraviolet light curves are calculated for several thermonuclear supernova models using a multifrequency radiation hydrodynamic code. It is found that Chandrasekhar-mass models produce very similar light curves both for detonation and deflagration. Sub-Chandrasekhar-mass models essentially differ from ``normal'' Chandrasekhar ones regarding behaviour of their UV fluxes. Differences in absolute brightness and in shape of light curves of thermonuclear supernovae could be detectable up to 300 Mpc with modern UV space telescopes.
Core collapse supernovae are dominated by energy transport from neutrinos. Therefore, some supernova properties could depend on symetries and features of the standard model weak interactions. The cross section for neutrino capture is larger than that for antineutrino capture by one term of order the neutrino energy over the nucleon mass. This reduces the ratio of neutrons to protons in the $\nu$-driven wind above a protoneutron star by approximately 20 % and may significantly hinder r-process nucleosynthesis.
In this paper we use a generalized version of a method originally proposed by Holz and Wald to investigate the effects from gravitational lensing on Type Ia supernovae measurements. We find that results for different mass distributions in smooth dark matter halos are very similar, making lensing effects predictable for a broad range of density profiles. Also, a sample of 100 supernovae at z = 1, should be sufficient to discriminate between the case of all dark matter in smooth halos and the extreme case of all dark matter in point-like objects.
We present a BeppoSAX observation of the X-ray source AX J0851.9-4617.4 that has been proposed as the neutron star associated to the shell like-supernova remnant RX J0852.0-4622. The image at E>5 keV shows the presence of a new source, SAX J0852.0-4615, not resolved from AX J0851.9-4617.4 in previous observations. The improved positional accuracy obtained for AX J0851.9-4617.4 confirms its possible identification with an early type star, also consistent with its soft thermal spectrum (kT~1.3 keV). SAX J0852.0-4615, with a harder X-ray spectrum and a higher X-ray to optical flux ratio, is a more likely candidate for the neutron star associated to the supernova remnant.
In this short review I suggest that recent developments support the conjecture that Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) are the complete disruptions of Chandrasekhar-mass carbon-oxygen white dwarfs in single-degenerate binary systems. The causes of the observational diversity of SNe Ia within the context of this standard model, and the implications of the model for young remnants of SNe Ia, are briefly discussed.
Wide field CCD observations of three, less known, supernova remnants. Filamentary and diffuse emission is discovered from the supernova remnant G67.7+1.8. Emission can also be seen in the ROSAT All Sky Survey data which indicate an extended hard X-ray source. The optical radiation from the G31.5-0.6 area shows weak sulfur emission and is probably not related to the remnant. Weak sulfur emission is also observed from W51C or G49.2-0.7. However, a small patch of emission in the south-east seems to emit strong sulfur emission. Results from long slit spectra are also presented.
We discuss recent evidence for an accelerating Universe from measurements of type Ia supernovae at high redshift, and describe tests of various systematic effects such as extinction and evolution that could be biasing the cosmological result. Continued observations of these objects, both over a wider wavelength region and at higher redshift, should provide strong evidence in favor or against the accelerating Universe hypothesis.
There are a half-dozen or so young supernova remnants in the Magellanic Clouds that display one or more of the following characteristics: high velocity (>1000 km/s) emission, enhanced metallicity, or a rapidly rotating pulsar. I summarize the current state of knowledge of these remnants and present some recent results mostly from the new X-ray astronomy satellites.
Many radioactive nuclei relevant for gamma-ray astrophysics are synthesized during explosive events, such as classical novae and supernovae. A review of recent results of explosive nucleosynthesis in these scenarios is presented, with a special emphasis on the ensuing gamma-ray emission from individual nova and supernova explosions. The influence of the dynamic properties of the ejecta on the gamma-ray emission features, as well as the still remaining uncertainties in nova and supernova models is also reviewed.
We propose an approximation to full relativity that captures the main gravitational effects of dynamical importance in supernovae. The conceptual link between this formalism and the Newtonian limit is such that it could likely be implemented relatively easily in existing multidimensional Newtonian gravitational hydrodynamics codes employing a Poisson solver. As a test of the formalism's utility, we display results for rapidly rotating (and therefore highly deformed) neutron stars.
We report on our search for the optical counterparts of the Southern Hemisphere anomalous X-ray pulsar 1E1048.1-5937 and the radio-quiet neutron stars in supernova remnants Puppis A, RCW 103, and PKS 1209-52. The observations were carried out with the new MIT/CfA MagIC camera on the Magellan-I 6.5 m telescope in Chile. We present deep multiband optical images of the X-ray error circles for each of these targets and discuss the resulting candidates and limits.
We use the very simple and successful Cannonball Model (CB) of gamma ray bursts (GRBs) and their afterglows (AGs) to analyze the observations of the strongly extinct optical AG of the relatively nearby GRB 011121, which were made with ground-based telescopes at early times, and with the HST at later time. We show that GRB 011121 was indeed associated with a 1998bw-like supernova at the GRB's redshift, as we had specifically predicted for this GRB before the supernova could be observed.
Spherically symmetric simulations of stellar core collapse and post-bounce evolution are used to test the sensitivity of the supernova dynamics to different variations of the input physics. We consider a state-of-the-art description of the neutrino-nucleon interactions, possible lepton-number changing neutrino reactions in the neutron star, and the potential impact of hydrodynamic mixing behind the supernova shock.
We discuss the implication of the observation of supernova relic neutrinos on the study of the star formation rate (SFR) in galaxies. The limit recently obtained at Super-Kamiokande (SK) is already marginally significant: The SFR we derived $\psi(t_0)<0.040M_{\odot}$yr$^{-1}$Mpc$^{-3}$(at a 90% CL) is about twice the SFR estimated from radio observations, and five times the rate from H$\alpha$ allowing for uncertainties in the model supernova neutrino flux.
We show that the supernova neutrino signal in terrestrial detectors could give characteristic signatures as the shock propagates through the regions where matter-enhanced neutrino flavor transformation takes place. This effect could allow existing and proposed supernova neutrino detectors to provide new insights into the problem of shock re-generation and propagation. Alternatively, such observations could allow unique insights into the neutrino mass and mixing matrix.
I examine the hypothesis that many of the high velocity white dwarfs observed by Oppenheimer et al. (2001) are the remnants of donor stars from binaries that produced type Ia supernovae via the `single degenerate' channel. If this channel is a significant contributor to the Galactic SN Ia supernova rate, then the local density of such remnants with V>100 km/s could be as high as 2.e-4 per cubic parsec, comparable to the densities found by Oppenheimer et al. This white dwarf population differs from others in that it is composed exclusively of single stars.
A summary of X-ray observations of supernova remnants is presented including the explosion fragment A of the Vela SNR, Tycho, N132D, RX J0852-4622, the Crab Nebula and the 'bulls eye', and SN 1987A, high-lighting the progress made with Chandra and XMM-Newton and touching upon the questions which arise from these observations and which might inspire future research.
Models of SN driven galactic winds for ellipticals are presented. We assume that ellipticals formed at high redshift and suffered an intense burst of star formation. The role of supernovae of type II and Ia in the chemical enrichment and in triggering galactic winds is studied. In particular, several recipes for SN feed-back together with detailed nucleosynthesis prescriptions are considered. It is shown that SNe of type II have a dominant role in enriching the interstellar medium of elliptical galaxies whereas type Ia SNe dominate the enrichment and the energetics of the intracluster medium.
This Resource Letter provides a guide to the literature on the observations of supernovae and the theory of their explosion mechanisms. Journal articles and books are cited for the following topics: observations of the spectra, spectropolarimetry, and light curves of supernovae of various types, theory of thermonuclear explosions, core collapse, and radioactive decay, applications to cosmology, and possible connections to gamma-ray bursts.
Recent observations have revealed many new puzzles related to core-collapse supernovae, including the formation of magnetars and black holes and their possible GRB connections. We review our current understanding of the origin of pulsar kicks and supernova asymmetry. It is argued that neutron star kicks are intimately connected to the other fundamental parameters of young neutron stars, such as the initial spin and magnetic field strength.
Core-collapse supernovae can be used to place limits on dark matter candidate particles, but the strength of these limits depends on the depth of our theoretical understanding of these astrophysical events. To date, limitations on computing power have prevented inclusion of all the physics that would constitute a realistic simulation. The TeraScale Supernova Initiative (TSI) will overcome these obstacles in the next few years, elucidating the explosion mechanism and other phenomena closely associated with the core collapse of massive stars.
Thermonuclear supernovae are valuable for cosmology but their physics is not yet fully understood. Modeling the development and propagation of nuclear flame is complicated by numerous instabilities. The predictions of supernova light curves still involve some simplifying assumptions, but one can use the comparison of the computed fluxes with observations to constrain the explosion mechanism. In spite of great progress in recent years, a number of issues remains unsolved both in flame physics and light curve modeling.
It might be thought that supernova remnants (SNRs) more distant than a few kiloparsec from Earth could not have been detected by the EGRET experiment. This work analyzes the observational status of this statement in the light of new CO studies of SNRs.
The light curve of SN 1572 is described in the terms used nowadays to characterize SNeIa. By assembling the records of the observations done in 1572--74 and evaluating their uncertainties, it is possible to recover the light curve and the color evolution of this supernova. It is found that, within the SNe Ia family, the event should have been a SNIa with a normal rate of decline, its stretch factor being {\it s} $\sim$ 0.9. Visual light curve near maximum, late--time decline and the color evolution sustain this conclusion. After correcting for extinction, the luminosity of this supernova is found to be M$_{V}$ $=$ --19.58 --5 log (D/3.5 kpc) $\pm$ 0.42.
We examine effects of small-scale fluctuations with angle in the neutrino radiation in core-collapse supernova explosions. As the mode number of fluctuations increases, the results approach those of spherical explosion. We conclude that global anisotropy of the neutrino radiation is the most effective mechanism of increasing the explosion energy when the total neutrino luminosity is given.
The statistics of SN discoveries is used to reveal selection biases of past and current SN searches and to gain insight on the progenitor scenarios for the different SN types. We also report estimates of the SN rate per unit mass in galaxies of different types and on the first attempts to study the evolution of the supernova rate with redshift.
Supernova can be polarized by an asymmetry in the explosion process, an off-center source of illumination, scattering in an envelope distorted by rotation or a binary companion, or scattering by the circumstellar dust. Careful polarimetry is the most powerful tool to study the 3-D geometry of supernovae. A deep understanding of the 3-D geometry of SNe is essential in using them for calibrated distance indicators.
There are point-like sources in central regions of several supernova remnants which have not been detected outside the X-ray range. The X-ray spectra of these Central Compact Objects (CCOs) have thermal components with blackbody temperatures of 0.2-0.5 keV and characteristic sizes of 0.3-3 km. Most likely, the CCOs are neutron stars born in supernova explosions. We overview their observational properties, emphasizing the Chandra data, and compare them with magnetars.
Observations over the last decade have shown that neutron stars receive a large kick velocity (of order a hundred to a thousand km/s) at birth. The physical origin of the kicks and the related supernova asymmetry is one of the central unsolved mysteries of supernova research. We review the physics of different kick mechanisms, including hydrodynamically driven, neutrino -- magnetic field driven, and electromagnetically driven kicks. The viabilities of the different kick mechanisms are directly related to the other key parameters characterizing nascent neutron stars, such as the initial magnetic field and the initial spin. Recent observational constraints on kick mechanisms are also discussed.
We demonstrate the importance of anisotropic neutrino radiation in the mechanism of core-collapse supernova explosions. Through a new parameter study with a fixed radiation field of neutrinos, we show that global anisotropy of the neutrino radiation is the most effective mechanism of increasing the explosion energy when the total neutrino luminosity is given. We discuss the reason why, and demonstrate how sensitively the success of a supernova explosion depends on the neutrino luminosity.
Recent progress in modeling core-collapse supernovae is summarized and set in perspective. Two-dimensional simulations with state-of-the-art treatment of neutrino transport still fail to produce powerful explosions, but evidence is presented that they are very close to success.
We study the evolution of supernova remnants in the circumstellar medium formed by mass loss from the progenitor star. The properties of this interaction are investigated, and the specific case of a 35 $\msun$ star is studied in detail. The evolution of the SN shock wave in this case may have a bearing on other SNRs evolving in wind-blown bubbles, especially SN 1987A.
We show by two-dimensional and first three-dimensional simulations of neutrino-driven supernova explosions that low (l=1,2) modes can dominate the flow pattern in the convective postshock region on timescales of hundreds of milliseconds after core bounce. This can lead to large global anisotropy of the supernova explosion and pulsar kicks in excess of 500 km/s.
We study a type Ia supernova explosion using three-dimensional numerical simulations based on reactive fluid dynamics. We consider a delayed-detonation model that assumes a deflagration-to-detonation transition. In contrast to the pure deflagration model, the delayed-detonation model releases enough energy to account for a healthy explosion, and does not leave carbon, oxygen, and intermediate-mass elements in central parts of a white dwarf. This removes the key disagreement between simulations and observations, and makes a delayed detonation the mostly likely mechanism for type Ia supernovae.
Weak lensing observations and supernova observations, combined with CMB observations, can both provide powerful constraints on dark energy properties. Considering statistical errors only, we find luminosity distances inferred from 2000 supernovae and large-scale (l < 1000) angular power spectra inferred from redshift-binned cosmic shear maps place complementary constraints on w_0 and w_a where w(z) = w_0 + w_a(a-1). Further, each set of observations can constrain higher-dimensional parameterizations of w(z); we consider eigenmodes of the w(z) error covariance matrix and find such datasets can each constrain the amplitude of about 5 w(z) eigenmodes. We also consider another parameterization of the dark energy.
We present full-star simulations of Type Ia supernova explosions on the basis of the standard Chandrasekhar-mass deflagration model. Most simulations so far considered only one spatial octant and assumed mirror symmetry to the other octants. Two full-star models are evolved to homologous expansion and compared with previous single-octant simulations. Therefrom we analyze the effect of abolishing the artificial symmetry constraint on the evolution of the flame surface. It turns out that the development of asymmetries depends on the chosen initial flame configuration. Such asymmetries of the explosion process could possibly contribute to the observed polarization of some Type Ia supernova spectra.
We show that rotation strongly affects the nature of the supernova progenitor (blue/red supergiant or Wolf--Rayet star), and thus the supernova types. In particular our models well reproduce the variations of the number ratio SNIb/Ic to SNII with metallicity. Rotation also produces envelope enrichments of the N/C ratio, and increases the size of the CO cores. We show the evolution of the specific angular momentum up to the preSN stage and make comparison with neutron stars. We suggest that the rare WO stars, preferentially formed at low metallicity, are the progenitors of GRB.
Present and future observations of supernova relic neutrinos (SRNs), i.e., a cosmological neutrino background from past core-collapse supernova explosions, potentially give us useful information concerning various fields of astrophysics, cosmology and particle physics. We review recent progress of theoretical and observational studies of SRNs, particularly focusing on the detectability and also on implications for cosmic star formation history and neutrino physics.
A straightforward formalism to evaluate the impact of Type Ia Supernovae on large scale astrophysical issues is presented, together with analytical formulations for the SNIa rate following an instantaneous burst of Star Formation, for both single and double degenrates SNIa progenitors' models. Some applications of the parametrized formalism are illustrated. In particular, it is shown that the current SNIa rates measured in early and late type galaxies, as well as the Fe Mass-to-Light ratio in clusters of galaxies, favour the double degenerate model.
Current understanding of core collapse and thermonuclear supernovae is reviewed. Recent progress in unveiling the nature of cosmic gamma-ray bursts (GRB) is discussed, with the focus on the apparent link of several GRBs with an energetic subclass of stellar explosions, type Ib/c core-collapse supernovae. This relation provides the strong case that the GRB phenomenon is connected with the final stages of massive star evolution and possibly with the formation of neutron stars and black holes.
Supernovae (SNe) were long suspected as possible progenitors of gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). The arguments relied on circumstantial evidence. Several recent GRBs, notably GRB 030329, have provided direct, spectroscopic evidence that SNe and GRBs are related. The SNe associated with GRBs are all of Type Ic, implying a compact progenitor, which has implications for GRB models. Other peculiar Type Ic SNe may help to expand understanding of the mechanisms involved.
Luminisity distances to the high-redshift Ia supernovas measured by the Supernova Cosmology Project team with the relativistic correction factors for redshift and time dilation led to the sensational conclusion about acceleration of universe expansion. The effect of relativistic aberration of high-redshift sources requires an additional correcting factor for the observed luminosities of SN Ia supernovas which can reduce the data to fit the universe with lambda = 0, i.e. without acceleration.
Many aspects of the explosion mechanism of Type Ia supernovae (SN Ia) still remain unclear -- causing uncertainties in the derived cosmological parameters. Realistic models of the generation and transport of radiation in the ejecta are required which link theoretical explosion models to observations. We aim to construct theoretical spectra and light curves from consistent radiative transfer models that allow to study the dependence of observable features on the physical parameters of the explosion.
We present a novel nonlinear mechanism for exciting a gravitational radiation pulse (or a gravitational wave) by dust magnetohydrodynamic (DMHD) waves in dusty astrophysical plasmas. We derive the relevant equations governing the dynamics of nonlinearly coupled DMHD waves and a gravitational wave (GW). The system of equations is used to investigate the generation of a GW by compressional Alfv\'{e}n waves in a type II supernova. The growth rate of our nonlinear process is estimated, and the results are discussed in the context of the gravitational radiation accompanying supernova explosions.
X-ray synchrotron emission tells us of the highest energy reached by accelerated electrons. In a few supernova remnants (SN 1006, G347.3-0.5) this is the dominant form of X-ray radiation, but in most it is superposed to the dominant thermal emission. Thanks to the spectro-imaging capability of Chandra and XMM-Newton, X-ray synchrotron emission has now been unambiguously detected in most young supernova remnants (Cas A, Tycho, Kepler). It arises in a very thin shell (a few arcsecs) at the blast wave. The thinness of that shell (much broader in the radio domain) implies that the high energy electrons cool down very fast behind the shock. The magnetic field that one deduces from that constraint is more than 100 muG behind the shock.
An alternative mechanism that dims high redshift supernovae without cosmic acceleration utilizes an oscillation of photons into a pseudo-scalar particle during transit. Since angular diameter distance measures are immune to the loss of photons, this ambiguity in interpretation can be resolved by combining CMB acoustic peak measurements with the recent baryon oscillation detection in galaxy power spectra. This combination excludes a non-accelerating dark energy species at the 4sigma level regardless of the level of the pseudo-scalar coupling. While solutions still exist with substantial non-cosmological dimming of supernovae, they may be tested with future improvement in baryon oscillation experiments.
An explanation is given of the low value of $R_\lambda \equiv A_\lambda/E(B-V) $, the ratio of absolute to selective extinction deduced from Type Ia supernova observations. The idea involves scattering by dust clouds located in the circumstellar environment, or at the highest velocity shells of the supernova ejecta. The scattered light tends to reduce the effective $R_\lambda$ in the optical, but has an opposite effect in the ultraviolet. The presence of circumstellar dust can be tested by ultraviolet to near infrared observations and by multi-epoch spectropolarimetry of SNe Ia.
We present a review of the first six years of Chandra X-ray Observatory observations of supernova remnants. From the official "first-light" observation of Cassiopeia A that revealed for the first time the compact remnant of the explosion, to the recent million-second spectrally-resolved observation that revealed new details of the stellar composition and dynamics of the original explosion, Chandra observations have provided new insights into the supernova phenomenon. We present an admittedly biased overview of six years of these observations, highlighting new discoveries made possible by Chandra's unique capabilities.
Core collapse supernovae are the leading actor in the story of the cosmic origin of the chemical elements. Existing models, which generally assume spherical symmetry and parameterize the explosion, have been able to broadly replicate the observed elemental pattern. However, inclusion of neutrino interactions produces noticeable improvement in the composition of the ejecta when compared to observations. Neutrino interactions may also provide a supernova source for light p-process nuclei.
We report a current status of our radiation-magnetohydrodynamic code for the study of core-collapse supernovae. In this contribution, we discuss the accuracy of our newly developed numerical code by presenting the test problem in a static background model. We also present the application to the spherically symmetric core-collapse simulations. Since close comparison with the previously published models is made, we are now applying it for the study of magnetorotational core-collapse supernovae.
We discuss results of analyzing a time series of selected photospheric-optical spectra of core collapse supernovae (CCSNe). This is accomplished by means of the parameterized supernovae synthetic spectrum (SSp) code   ``SYNOW''.   Special attention is addressed to traces of hydrogen at early phases, especially for the stripped-envelope SNe (i.e. SNe Ib-c). A thin low mass hydrogen layer extending to very high ejection velocities above the helium shell, is found to be the most likely scenario for Type Ib SNe.
The role of a resonant $\nu_e$-$\nu_s$ oscillation is discussed in the event of a supernova explosion. It is concluded that a significant $\nu_e$-$\nu_s$ mixing may hinder the ability of the supernova to explode. It may also cool the proto-neutron star too quickly with respect to the observed cooling time of several seconds. The constraints on the $\nu_e$-$\nu_s$ mixing parameters based on the above arguments are calculated.
The role of the sterile neutrinos to the r-process nucleosynthesis in supernova explosions is studied. Previously it has been argued that a large part of neutrino mixing can be excluded if the supernovae are the origin of the heavy elements. It is shown that a conversion to sterile neutrinos may evade those limits. The possibility that such conversions can enhance the nucleosynthesis is investigated. The desired mass spectrum is consistent with neutrino masses suggested by other observed phenomena, like the solar neutrino problem, the atmospheric neurino problem, dark matter and the LSND signals.
It has been noted for a long time that, in some circumstances, {\sl massless} neutrinos may be {\sl mixed} in the leptonic charged current. Conventional neutrino oscillation searches in vacuum are insensitive to this mixing. We discuss the effects of resonant massless-neutrino conversions in the dense medium of a supernova. In particular, we show how the detected $\bar\nu_e$ energy spectra from SN1987a and the supernova $r$-process nucleosynthesis may be used to provide very stringent constraints on the mixing of {\sl massless} neutrinos.
We show that in a supernova core the longitudinal photon (plasmon) has a space-like dispersion and Cerenkov absorption and emission of such photons is kinematically allowed. If the neutrino has a non-zero magnetic moment, then helicity flipping Cerenkov absorption of a plasmon $\nu_L+\gamma\to\nu_R$ is the most efficient cooling mechanism of the supernova core, and this allows us to put a restrictive bound on the neutrino magnetic moment $\mu_{\nu}~<~0.7\times 10^{-13}\mu_B$.
The active-sterile neutrino conversion is studied for neutrino propagating in the axial potential generated by magnetised electron plasma in the supernova medium. We consider the effect of random magnetic field $B_{rms}$ on the average neutrino conversion probability. We obtained the constraint on $\Delta m^2$ and $\sin^2 2\theta$ for different strength of the random magnetic fields, by considering the positive definiteness of the average neutrino conversion probability inside the supernova core. Our calculation shows that, $B_{rms}\le 0.63\times 10^{14}$ Gauss is preferable so that small values of $\Delta m^2$ can not be excluded.
Collective interactions of a beam of neutrinos/antineutrinos traversing a dense magnetized plasma of electrons/positrons, protons and neutrons are studied with particular reference to the case of a Supernova. We find that the ponderomotive force exerted by neutrinos gives, contrary to expectations, a negligible contribution to the revival of the shock for a successful Supernova explosion, although new types of convection and plasma cooling processes induced by the ponderomotive force could be, in principle, relevant for the dynamics itself.
We analyze the neutrino conversions inside a supernova in the 3$\nu$ mixing scheme, and their effects on the neutrino spectra observed at the earth. We find that the observations of the energy spectra of neutrinos from a future galactic supernova may enable us to identify the solar neutrino solution, to determine the sign of $\Delta m^2_{32}$, and to probe the mixing matrix element |U_{e3}|^2 to values as low as 10^{-4}-10^{-3}.
In this article I review the constraints on neutrino mass and mixing coming from type-II supernovae. The bounds obtained on these parameters from shock reheating, r-process nucleosynthesis and from SN1987A are discussed. Given the current constraints on neutrino mass and mixing the effect of oscillations of neutrinos from a nearby supernova explosion in future detectors will also be discussed.
We explore the earth matter effects on the energy spectra of neutrinos from a supernova. We show that the observations of the energy spectra of $\nu_e$ and $\bar{\nu}_e$ from a galactic supernova may enable us to identify the solar neutrino solution, to determine the sign of $\Delta m^2_{32}$, and to probe the mixing matrix element $|U_{e3}|^2$ to values as low as $10^{-3}$. We point out scenarios in which the matter effects can even be established through the observation of the spectrum at a single detector.
The unique constraints on neutrino oscillations which can be obtained by measuring the energy spectrum of supernova $\bar{\nu}_e$'s are first discussed. The focus is on 4-neutrino mass and mixing models capable of explaining the LSND evidence of $\bar{\nu}_{\mu}\to \bar{\nu}_e$ oscillations.   The potential of the Fermilab neutrino detector MiniBooNE to observe supernova neutrinos is then addressed, and a general description of the detector is given. As of May, 2002, the MiniBooNE detector is fully operational.
We use the detection of neutrinos from a future galactic type-II supernova event in a water Cerenkov detector like Super-Kamiokande to constrain the possible violation of spin-statistics by neutrinos resulting in their obeying a mixed statistics instead of Fermi-Dirac.
Detection of 5 events by the Liquid Scintillation Detector (LSD) on February, 23, 1987 was recently interpreted as a detection of the electron neutrino flux from the first stage of the two-stage Supernova collapse. We show that, if neutrino mass hierarchy is normal, such interpretation excludes values of neutrino mixing angle \theta_{13} larger than 3\cdot 10^{-2}, independently of the particular Supernova collapse model. Also constraints on the original fluxes of neutrinos and antineutrinos of different flavours are obtained.
We study the possibility to probe the spatial geometry of the Universe by supernova measurement of the cubic correction to the luminosity distance. We illustrate with an accelerating universe model with infinite-volume extra dimensions, for which the 1$\sigma$ level supernova results indicate that the Universe is closed.
We suggest that photons with energies between 5 and 10 MeV, generated by the ($\nu,\nu'p\gamma$) and ($\nu,\nu'n\gamma$) reactions on $^{16}$O, constitute a signal which allows a unique identification of supernova $\nu_\mu$ and $\nu_\tau$ neutrinos in water \v{C}erenkov detectors. We calculate the yield of such $\gamma$ events and estimate that a few hundred of them would be detected in Superkamiokande for a supernova at 10 kpc distance.
The next supernova in our galaxy will be detected by a variety of neutrino detectors. In this lecture I discuss the set of observables needed to constrain the models of supernova neutrino emission. They are the flux normalizations, and average energies, of each of the three expected components of the neutrino flux: $\nu_e$, $\bar{\nu}_e$, and $\nu_x$ (all the other four flavors combined). I show how the existing, or soon to be operational, neutrino detectors will be able to determine the magnitude of these observables, and estimate the corresponding rates.
I describe how the signals corresponding to the supernova $\nu_e$ and $\bar{\nu}_e$ (charged current reactions) as well as all active neutrinos (neutral current reactions) can be separately observed in various existing detectors. These observations would make it possible to determine the flux and average energy (or temperature) for each of these three neutrino signal components. I argue that all these quantities are needed in order to understand the interplay between the so far poorly known supernova neutrino emission process and the neutrino oscillations.
This paper reviews recent advances in the study or circumstellar masers and masers found toward supernova remnants. The review is organized by science focus area, including the astrophysics of extended stellar atmospheres, stellar mass-loss processes and outflows, late-type evolved stellar evolution, stellar maser excitation and chemistry, and the use of stellar masers as independent distance estimators. Masers toward supernova remnants are covered separately. Recent advances and open future questions in this field are explored.
The discovery of the 6.67 hr periodicity in the X-ray source 1E 161348-5055 associated with the supernova remnant RCW 103 has raised interesting suggestions about the nature of the X-ray source. Here we argue that in either accreting neutron star or magnetar model, a supernova fallback disk may be a critical ingredient in theoretical interpretations of 1E 161348-5055. We further emphasize the effect of fallback disks on the evolution of young compact objects in various ways, and suggest that even SS 433 could also be powered by fallback disk accretion process.
We calculate cosmological and astrophysical bounds on the couplings between standard model fields and tensor unparticles. The present day density of tensor unparticles from neutrino-neutrino and photon-photon annihilation is calculated. Also, the supernovae volume energy loss rates from electron-positron and photon-photon annihilation to tensor unparticles are calculated. The constraints from matter density and supernovae volume energy loss rates from photon-photon annihilation are on the same order of magnitude, while the bounds from supernovae volume energy loss rates from electron-positron annihilation are an order of magnitude lower. We find the couplings between standard model fields and tensor unparticles are at least an order of magnitude lower than those used for previous studies of tensor unparticle collider phenomenology.
We present a large number of two and a half dimensional simulations of supernova remnants expanding into interstellar media having a range of densities, temperatures and magnetic field strengths. The volume of hot gas produced is strongly dependent on the inclusion of thermal conduction and magnetic fields. The four-volumes and three-areas of hot gas have been catalogued and their dependence on interstellar parameters documented. Simulated line widths of radioactive species ejected by supernovae have also been catalogued.
Radio images of supernova remnants in the framework of diffusion model are discussed. The distribution profiles of synchrotron radiation intensity for spherical injection source of relativistic electrons are reduced at different frequencies. An explanation of the observational data obtained on UTR-2, according to which the size of the supernova remnant at decametric waves is larger than the remnant size at high frequencies, is given.
Recent nucleosynthesis calculations of Type II supernovae using advanced neutrino transport determine that the early neutrino winds are proton-rich. However, a fraction of the ejecta emitted at the same time is composed of neutron-rich pockets. In this paper we calculate the nucleosynthesis contribution from the neutron-rich pockets in the hot convective bubbles of a core-collapse supernova and show that they do not contribute significantly to the total nucleosynthesis.
Analysis of the polarization of light from supernovae can reveal the shape and distribution of matter ejected from exploding stars. Here we review the young field of Type Ia supernova spectropolarimetry and critically evaluate, and place in context, the recent work of Wang et al. (2007, Science, 315, 212) in which a suggestive trend is found in data from 17 Type Ia events.
We investigate the diffusive shock acceleration in the presence of the non-resonant streaming instability introduced by Bell (2004). The numerical MHD simulations of the magnetic field amplification combined with the analytical treatment of cosmic ray acceleration permit us to calculate the maximum energy of particles accelerated by high-velocity supernova shocks. The estimates for Cas A, Kepler, SN1006, and Tycho historical supernova remnants are given. We also found that the amplified magnetic field is preferentially oriented perpendicular to the shock front downstream of the fast shock. This explains the origin of the radial magnetic fields observed in young supernova remnants.
A review of the main issues in the field of particle acceleration in Supernova Remnants is provided in the context of future X-ray observations with Simbol-X. After a summary of the nonthermal acceleration mechanisms at work, I briefly review the observations of supernova remnants in hard X-rays and in gamma rays. Open issues are discussed in this framework.
A core collapse in the Milky Way will produce an enormous burst of neutrinos in detectors world-wide. Such a burst has the potential to provide an early warning of a supernova's appearance. I will describe the nature of the signal, the sensitivity of current detectors, and SNEWS, the SuperNova Early Warning System, a network designed to alert astronomers as soon as possible after the detected neutrino signal.
The main observational properties and resulting classification of supernovae (SNe) are briefly reviewed. Then we discuss the progress in modeling of two basic types of SNe - the thermonuclear and core-collapse ones, with special emphasis being placed on difficulties relating to a consistent description of thermonuclear flame propagation and the detachment of supernova envelope from the collapsing core (a nascent neutron star). The properties of the neutrino flux expected from the corecollapse SNe, and the lessons of SN1987A, exploded in the Large Magellanic Cloud, are considered as well.
By adding a weak magnetic field to a spherically symmetric fluid configuration that caricatures a stalled shock in the post-bounce supernova environment, we explore the capacity of the stationary accretion shock instability (SASI) to generate magnetic fields. The SASI develops upon perturbation of the initial condition, and the ensuing flow generates--{\em in the absence of rotation}--dynamically significant magnetic fields ($\sim 10^{15}$ G) on a time scale that is relevant for the explosion mechanism of core-collapse supernovae. We describe our model, present some recent results, and discuss their potential relevance for supernova models.
We consider sterile neutrinos with rest masses ~0.2 GeV. Such sterile neutrinos could augment core collapse supernova shock energies by enhancing energy transport from the core to the vicinity of the shock front. The decay of these neutrinos could produce a flux of very energetic active neutrinos, detectable by future neutrino observations from a galactic supernova. The relevant range of sterile neutrino masses and mixing angles can be probed in future laboratory experiments.
The ESSENCE project was a six year supernova search carried out with the CTIO 4-m telescope. We also obtained spectra with many of the world's largest ground-based telescopes and observed some of our SNe with the Hubble Space Telescope and the Spitzer Space Telescope. We achieved our goal of discovering over 200 Type Ia SNe in the redshift range 0.2 to 0.8. With these data we determined the cosmic equation of state parameter to +/- 10 percent. The data are consistent with a geometrically flat universe whose dark energy is equivalent to Einstein's cosmological constant.
We point out possible features of neutrino spectra from a future galactic core collapse supernova that will enhance our understanding of neutrino mixing as well as supernova astrophysics. We describe the neutrino flavor conversions inside the star, emphasizing the role of "collective effects" that has been appreciated and understood only very recently. These collective effects change the traditional predictions of flavor conversion substantially, and enable the identification of neutrino mixing scenarios through signatures like Earth matter effects.
The Mn to Cr mass ratio in supernova ejecta has recently been proposed as a tracer of Type Ia SN progenitor metallicity. We review the advantages and problems of this observable quantity, and discuss them in the framework of two Galactic supernova remnants: the well known Tycho SNR and W49B, an older object that has been tentatively classified as Type Ia. The fluxes of the Mn and Cr Ka lines in the X-ray spectra of these SNRs observed by the Suzaku and ASCA satellites suggest progenitors of supersolar metallicity for both objects.
Impact of supernova explosion on the neutron star magnetosphere in a massive binary system is considered. The supernova shock striking the NS magnetosphere filled with plasma can lead to the formation of a magnetospheric tail with significant magnetic energy. The magnetic field reconnection in the current sheet formed can convert the magnetic energy stored in the tail into kinetic energy of accelerated charged particles. Plasma instabilities excited by beams of relativistic particles can lead to the formation of a short pulse of coherent radio emission with parameters similar to those of the observed bright extragalactic millisecond radio burst (Lorimer et al. 2007).
We report the likely detection of near-infrared 2.29 $\mu$m first overtone Carbon Monoxide (CO) emission from the young supernova remnant Cassiopeia A (Cas A). The continuum-subtracted CO filter map reveals CO knots within the ejecta-rich reverse shock. We compare the first overtone CO emission with that found in the well-studied supernova, SN 1987A and find $\sim$30 times less CO in Cas A. The presence of CO suggests that molecule mixing is small in the SN ejecta and that astrochemical processes and molecule formation may continue at least ~300 years after the initial explosion.
The Mn to Cr mass ratio in supernova ejecta has recently been proposed as a tracer of Type Ia SN progenitor metallicity. We review the advantages and problems of this observable quantity, and discuss them in the framework of the Tycho Supernova Remnant. The fluxes of the Mn and Cr Kalpha lines in the X-ray spectra of Tycho observed by the Suzaku satellite suggests a progenitor of supersolar metallicity.
The letter presents 25 discovered supernova candidates from SDSS-DR7 with our dedicated method, called Sample Decrease, and 10 of them were confirmed by other research groups, and listed in this letter. Another 15 are first discovered including 14 type Ia and one type II based on Supernova Identification (SNID) analysis. The results proved that our method is reliable, and the description of the method and some detailed spectra analysis procedures were also presented in this letter.
G35.6-0.4 is an extended radio source in the Galactic plane which has previously been identified as either a supernova remnant or an HII region. Observations from the VLA Galactic Plane Survey at 1.4 GHz with a resolution of 1 arcmin allow the extent of G35.6-0.4 to be defined for the first time. Comparison with other radio survey observations show that this source has a non-thermal spectral index, with alpha -0.47 +/- 0.07. G35.6-0.4 does not have obvious associated infra-red emission, so it is identified as a Galactic supernova remnant, not an HII region. It is approximately 15 x 11 arcmin**2 in extent, showing partial limb brightening.
In this paper, we first discuss the detection of supernova neutrino on Earth. Then we propose a possible method to acquire information about $\theta_{13}$ smaller than $1.5^\circ$ by detecting the ratio of the event numbers of different flavor supernova neutrinos. Such an sensitivity cannot yet be achieved by the Daya Bay reactor neutrino experiment.
When the neutrino density is very high, as in core-collapse supernovae, neutrino-neutrino interactions are not negligible and can appreciably affect the evolution of flavour. The physics of these phenomena is briefly highlighted, and their effects are shown on observable energy spectra from a future galactic supernova within two-neutrino and three-neutrino frameworks. Detection of such effects could provide a handle on two unknowns: the neutrino mass hierarchy, and the mixing angle theta(13).
We review the observational evidence for dust formation in Wolf-Rayet binary systems and in Type II Supernova ejecta. Existing theoretical models describing the condensation of solids in carbon-rich Wolf-Rayet stars and in Supernovae close by and at high redshift are discussed. We describe new modeling of carbon- and oxygen-based grain nucleation using a chemical kinetic approach applied to the ejecta of massive pair-instability Supernovae in the early universe. Finally, dust formation processes in colliding wind regions of WC binary systems are discussed.
We present the results of new Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) observations of one of the largest supernova remnants, SNR J0450-709, in the Local Group of galaxies. We found that this Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) ob ject exhibits a typical morphology of an old supernova remnant (SNR) with diameter D=102x75+-1 pc and radio spectral index alpha=-0.43+-0.06. Regions of high polarisation were detected with peak value of ~40%.
We provide an equation of state for high density supernova matter by applying a momentum-dependent effective interaction. We focus on the study of the equation of state of high-density and high-temperature nuclear matter containing leptons (electrons and neutrinos) under the chemical equilibrium condition. Thermal effects on the properties and equation of state of nuclear matter are evaluated and analyzed in the framework of the proposed effective interaction model. Since supernova matter is characterized by a constant entropy we also present the thermodynamic properties for the isentropic case.
Following an initial explosion that might be launched either by magnetic interactions or neutrinos, a rotating magnetar radiating according to the classic dipole formula could power a very luminous supernova. While some 56Ni might be produced in the initial explosion, the peak of the light curve in a Type I supernova would not be directly related to its mass. In fact, the peak luminosity would be most sensitive to the dipole field strength of the magnetar. The tail of the light curve could resemble radioactive decay for some time but, assuming complete trapping of the pulsar emission, would eventually be brighter. Depending on the initial explosion energy, both high and moderate velocities could accompany a very luminous light curve.
Thermodynamical Behaviour of Inhomogeneous Universe with Varying $ \Lambda $ in Presence of Electromagnetic Field is obtained. $ F_{12} $ is the non-vanishing component of electromagnetic field tensor. To get a deterministic solution, it is assumed that the free gravitational field is Petrov type-II non-degenerate.The value of cosmological constant is found to be small and pasitive supported by recent results from the supernovae observations recently obtained by High-Z Supernovae Ia Team and Supernovae Cosmological Project. A relation between cosmological constant and thermodynamical quantities is established. Some physical and geometric properties of the model are also discussed.
We summarize our current understanding of the neutrino flavor conversions inside a core collapse supernova, clarifying the important role played by the "collective effects" in determining flavor conversion probabilities. The potentially observable $\nu_e$ and $\bar{\nu}_e$ spectra may help us identify the neutrino mixing scenario, distinguish between primary flux models, and learn more about the supernova explosion.
We calculate the emissivity due to neutrino-pair production in $e^+e^-$ annihilation in the context of a left-right symmetric model in a way that can be used in supernova calculations. We also present some simple estimates which show that such process can act as an efficient energy-loss mechanism in the shocked supernova core. We find that the emissivity is dependent of the mixing angle $\phi$ of the model in the allowed range for this parameter.
The discovery of accelerated expansion using supernova surveys has been one of the most surprising discoveries in cosmology in the past ten years. Present and future surveys, among which SNLS, JDEM or LSST, are based on samples of a few hundreds to a million supernovae. The measurement of their spectroscopic redshifts to investigate dark energy properties is already by far the limiting aspect of such surveys. In this paper, I will discuss and illustrate with SNLS data an approach based solely on photometry to both select supernova candidates and determine their redshift.
Recent observational data on the type Ia supernova rates are in excellent agreement with the old prediction of the population synthesis of binary stars and confirm that the overwhelming majority of type Ia supernovas (~99%) in elliptical galaxies form via mergers of binary white dwarfs with the total mass exceeding the Chandrasekhar limit.
The spectra of high-energy protons and nuclei accelerated by supernova remnant shocks are calculated taking into account magnetic field amplification and Alfvenic drift both upstream and downstream of the shock for different types of supernova remnants during their evolution. The maximum energy of accelerated particles may reach $5\cdot10^{18}$ eV for Fe ions in Type IIb SNRs. The calculated energy spectrum of cosmic rays after propagation through the Galaxy is in good agreement with the spectrum measured at the Earth.
Motivated by a recent discovery of Supernova 2010gx and numerical results of Fryer et al.(2010), we simulate light curves for several type I supernova models, enshrouded by dense circumstellar shells, or "super-wind", rich in carbon and oxygen and having no hydrogen. We demonstrate that the most luminous events like SN2010gx can be explained by those models at moderate explosion energies (2-3) foe if the total mass of SN ejecta and a shell is (3-5) Msun and the radius of the shell is ~10^{16} cm.
Type Ia supernovae are thought to result from thermonuclear explosions of carbon-oxygen white dwarf stars. This model generally explains the observed properties with certain exceptions, like sub-luminous supernovae. Here we discuss the possibility of sub-Chandrasekhar WDs detonating due to the build up of a layer of helium on the C-O WD by accreting from a helium rich companion star to explain observed deviations such as subluminous type Ia. We also detail some of the energetics involved that will make such scenarios plausible.
After almost three years of data taking in sky survey mode, the \emph{Fermi}-LAT has detected $\gamma$-ray emission toward the Tycho's Supernova Remnant (SNR). The Tycho SNR is among the youngest remnants in the Galaxy, originating from a Type Ia Supernova in AD 1572. The $\gamma$-ray integral flux from 400 MeV up to 100 GeV has been measured to be (3.5$\pm1.1_{stat}\pm0.7_{syst}$)$\times10^{-9}$ cm$^{-2}$s$^{-1}$ with a photon index of 2.3$\pm0.2_{stat}\pm0.1_{syst}$.
We calculate cross sections for the neutral current induced neutrino/antineutrino reaction from $^{208}Pb$ target and applied it to study Supernova neutrino event rates. The calculations are done in local density approximation taking into account Pauli blocking, Fermi motion effects and renormalization of weak transition strengths in the nuclear medium. The numerical results for the neutrino nucleus total cross sections have been averaged over the various Supernova neutrino/antineutrino fluxes available in literature.
The remnants of Type Ia supernovae can provide important clues about their progenitor-histories. We discuss two well-observed supernova remnants (SNRs) that are believed to result from a Type Ia SN and use various tools to shed light on the possible progenitor history. We find that Kepler's SNR is consistent with a symbiotic binary progenitor consisted of a white dwarf and an AGB star. Our hydrosimulations can reproduce the observed kinematic and morphological properties. For Tycho's remnant we use the characteristics of the X-ray spectrum and the kinematics to show that the ejecta has likely interacted with dense circumstellar gas.
These conference proceedings cover various aspects of neutrino propagation through the high matter and neutrino densities near the proto-neutron star in a core-collapse supernova. A significant feature of this regime is the impact of neutrino-neutrino interactions. Properties of this non-linear many-neutrino system are discussed with a particular emphasis on its symmetries.
We present results from the first generation of multi-dimensional general relativistic neutrino hydrodynamics simulations of core-collapse supernovae. A comparison with models computed using either the purely Newtonian approximation or the "effective gravitational potential" approach reveals appreciable quantitative differences in the heating conditions and the gravitational wave spectra. Our results underscore the important role of general relativity in the supernova problem (which appears to be on par with other important factors such as the dimensionality and the equation of state) both for our understanding of the explosion dynamics as well as for predictions of observable signatures.
In order to explore various aspects of stellar evolution, supernovae, gamma ray bursts and nucleosynthesis, we have developed a new efficient stellar evolution code. In this paper we describe this new code and compare the results with the ones calculated by the previous code. Specifically we focus on the progenitor evolution of lower end of the Fe-core collapse supernovae, and mass distribution of remnant neutron stars. We describe how different assumptions will lead different neutron star mass distribution. We also review recent works of our research group.
The locations of massive stars (> 8 Msun) within their host galaxies is reviewed. These range from distributed OB associations to dense star clusters within giant HII regions. A comparison between massive stars and the environments of core-collapse supernovae and long duration Gamma Ray Bursts is made, both at low and high redshift. We also address the question of the upper stellar mass limit, since very massive stars (VMS, Minit >> 100 Msun) may produce exceptionally bright core-collapse supernovae or pair instability supernovae.
In a recent paper Sule et al. (Astronomical Notes, vol. 332 (2011), 655) argued that an early 17th-century Indian mural of the constellation Sagittarius with a dragon-headed tail indicated that the bright supernova of 1604 was also sighted by Indian astronomers. In this paper it will be shown that this identification is based on a misunderstanding of traditional Islamic astrological iconography and that the claim that the mural represents an early 17th-century Indian sighting of the supernova of 1604 has to be rejected.
We report on evidence for black hole spindown in the light curves of the BATSE catalogue of 1491 long GRBs by application of matched filtering. This observation points to a strong interaction of the black hole with surrounding high density matter at the ISCO, inducing non-axisymmetric instabilities sustained by cooling in gravitational wave emission. Opportunities for LIGO-Virgo and the recently funded KAGRA experiments are highlighted, for long GRBs with and without supernovae and for hyper-energetic core-collapse supernovae within a distance of about 35 Mpc in the Local Universe.
Super-luminous supernova (SLSN) are supernovae showing extreme properties in their light-curves: high peak luminosities (more than 10 times brighter than bright SN Ia), and long durations. Several mechanisms have been proposed for SLSN, such as pair instability SN of a massive progenitor, interaction of the ejecta with a massive circumstellar shell, and the dual-shock quark nova (dsQN) model. The dual-shock quark nova model is unique in that it predicts a normal SN event will be seen about 10 days prior to the main SLSN event. The dsQN model is described here and shown that it is consistent with the light curve of the one currently known double-humped SLSN, 2006oz.
Current surveys are underway to utilize gravitational lensing by galaxy clusters with Einstein radii >35" in the search for the highest redshift galaxies. Associated supernova from the epoch of reionization would have their fluxes boosted above the detection threshold, extending their duration of visibility. We predict that the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) will be able to discover lensed core-collapse supernovae at redshifts exceeding z=7-8.
When a massive star ends its life, its core collapses, forming a neutron star or black hole and producing some of the most energetic explosions in the universe. Core-collapse supernovae and long-duration gamma-ray bursts are the violent signatures of compact remnant formation. As such, both fields are intertwined and, coupled with theory, observations of transients can help us better understand compact remnants just as neutron star and black hole observations can constrain the supernova and gamma-ray burst engine. We review these ties in this paper.
We point out that the commonly assumed condition for galactic outflows, that supernovae (SNe) heating is efficient in the central regions of starburst galaxies, suffers from invalid assumptions. We show that a large filling factor of hot ($\ge 10^6$ K) gas is difficult to achieve through SNe heating, irrespective of the initial gas temperature and density, and of its being uniform or clumpy. We instead suggest that correlated supernovae from OB associations in molecular clouds in the central region can drive powerful outflows if the molecular surface density is $> 10^3$ M$_{\odot}$ pc$^{-2}$.
Expressions for surface brightness distribution and for flux density have been theoretically derived in the case of two simple models of a shell supernova remnant. The models are: a homogenous optically thin emitting shell with constant emissivity and a synchrotron shell source with radial magnetic field. Interactive Data Language (IDL) codes for fitting theoretically derived emission profiles assuming these two models to mean profiles of shell supernova remnants obtained from radio observations have been written.
We derive new bounds on hidden sector gauge bosons which could produce new energy loss mechanisms in supernovae, enlarging the excluded region in mass-coupling space by a significant factor compared to earlier estimates. Both considerations of trapping and possible decay of these particles need to be incorporated when determining such bounds, as does scattering on both neutrons and protons. For masses and couplings near the region which saturates current bounds, a significant background of such gauge bosons may also be produced due to the cumulative effects of all supernovae over cosmic history.
One Population III dud supernova produces enough oxygen to enable ten million solar masses of primordial gas to bind into M dwarfs. This is possible because radiation from other Population III stars implodes the mixture of oxygen ejecta and primordial gas into a globular cluster. Model atmosphere calculations for oxygen dwarfs show that water blocks most of the infrared flux. The flux is redistributed into the visible to produce an unfamiliar, distinctive energy distribution. One million dud supernovae in a large protogalaxy are sufficient to produce the "dark matter" halo.
The neutrino helicity-flip process under the conditions of the supernova core is reinvestigated. Instead of the uniform ball model for the SN core used in previous analyses, realistic models for radial distributions and time evolution of physical parameters in the SN core are considered. A new upper bound on the Dirac neutrino magnetic moment is obtained from the limit on the supernova core luminosity for nu_R emission.
It is now about 10 years since the evidence, based on Type Ia supernovae, for the acceleration of the expansion of the Universe was discovered. I will discuss some aspects of the work and events in the Supernova Cosmology Project (SCP), during the period 1988 to 1998, which led to this discovery.
The study of shell-type supernova remnants is a key science focus for the VERITAS TeV telescope array. Supernova remnants (SNRs) are widely considered to be the strongest candidate for the source of cosmic rays below the knee around 10^15 eV. This presentation will highlight new VERITAS results including new measurements of the spectra of Cas A and IC 443 and observations of the "Forbidden Velocity Wing" FVW 190.2+1.1. These results and their implications for the nature of the cosmic rays - hadronic or electronic - accelerated in the remnants will be discussed.
The study of supernova remnants and pulsar wind nebulae was one of the Key Science Projects for the first two years of VERITAS observations. VERITAS is an array of four imaging Cherenkov telescopes located at the Whipple Observatory in southern Arizona. Supernova remnants are widely considered to be the strongest candidate for the source of cosmic rays below the knee at around 10^15 eV. Pulsar wind nebulae are synchrotron nebulae powered by the spin-down of energetic young pulsars, and comprise one of the most populous very-high-energy gamma-ray source classes. This poster will summarize the results of this observation program.
Galactic cosmic rays are believed to be accelerated at supernova remnant shocks. Gamma-ray observations of both supernova remnants and associated molecular clouds have been used in several occasions to test (so far quite successfully) this popular hypothesis. Despite that, a conclusive solution to the problem of cosmic ray origin is still missing, and further observational and theoretical efforts are needed. In this paper, the current status of these investigations is briefly reviewed.
A core-collapse supernova will produce an enormous burst of neutrinos of all flavors in the few-tens-of-MeV range. Measurement of the flavor, time and energy structure of a nearby core-collapse neutrino burst will yield answers to many physics and astrophysics questions. The neutrinos left over from past cosmic supernovae are also observable, and their detection will improve knowledge of core collapse rates and average neutrino emission. This review describes experimental techniques for detection of core-collapse neutrinos, as well as the sensitivities of current and future detectors.
A recent paper by Harmut Traunm\"uller shows that the most adequate equation to interpret the observations on magnitude and redshift from 892 type 1a supernovae would be mu = 5 log[(1+z) ln(1+z)] + const. We discuss this result which is exacly the one we have obtained few years ago when postulating a relation between the speed of light and the expansion of the universe. We also compare our analytical result to the conclusion of Marosi who studied 280 supernovae and gamma-ray bursts in the range 0.1014 < z < 8.1. The difference between his results and ours is at worst of 0.3 %.
We study the role of light nuclear clusters in simulations of core-collapse supernovae. Expressions for the reaction rates are developed for a large selection of charged current absorption and scattering processes with light clusters. Medium modifications are taken into account at the mean-field level. We explore the possible impact on the supernova dynamics and the neutrino signal during the mass accretion phase prior to the possible explosion onset as well as during the subsequent protoneutron star deleptnoization after the explosion onset has been launched.
The set of supernova remnants (SNR) from Green's SNR catalog which are found in the VLA Galactic Plane Survey (VGPS) are the objects considered in this study. For these SNR, we extract and analyse HI absorption spectra in a uniform way and construct a catalogue of absorption spectra and distance determinations.
Here is considered the full evolution of a spherical supernova remnant. We start by calculating the early time ejecta dominated stage and continue through the different phases of interaction with the circumstellar medium, and end with the dissipation and merger phase. The physical connection between the phases reveals new results. One is that the blast wave radius during the adiabatic phase is significantly smaller than it would be, if one does notaccount for the blast wave interaction with the ejecta.
How do massive stars explode? Progress toward the answer is driven by increases in compute power. Petascale supercomputers are enabling detailed three-dimensional simulations of core-collapse supernovae. These are elucidating the role of fluid instabilities, turbulence, and magnetic field amplification in supernova engines.
Neutrino flux streaming from a supernova can undergo rapid flavor conversions almost immediately above the core. Focusing on this region, we study these fast conversions using a linear stability analysis. We find that, for realistic angular distributions of neutrinos, fast conversions can occur within a few nanoseconds in regions just above the neutrinosphere. Our results also show that neutrinos travelling towards the core make fast conversions more rapid. These conversions, if they exist, can have significant implications for supernova explosion mechanism and nucleosynthesis.
After more than forty years since the basic standard model for supernovae Ia was proposed many astronomers are still hopeful that this phenomenon will ultimately be understood in terms of Newtonian gravity plus nuclear and particle physics as they existed in the 1930's. In spite of this fact there are at least six nagging puzzles in supernova physics that suggest some radical new physics input may be necessary. "Radical" in this context means a physics idea that did not exist in the 1930's and that is still not experimentally confirmed in 2017.
We show that when a supernova explodes, a nearby pulsar signal goes through a very specific change. The observed period first changes smoothly, then is followed by a sudden change in the time derivative. A stable millisecond pulsar can allow us to measure such an effect. This may improve our measurement of the total energy released in neutrinos and also the orientation of the supernova-pulsar system.
Gravitational waves are a potential direct probe for the multi-dimensional flow during the first second of core-collapse supernova explosions. Here we outline the structure of the predicted gravitational wave signal from neutrino-driven supernovae of non-rotating progenitors from recent 2D and 3D simulations. We sketch some quantitative dependencies that govern the amplitudes of this signal and its evolution in the time-frequency domain.
Recent data indicate one or more moderately nearby supernovae in the early Pleistocene, with additional events likely in the Miocene. This has motivated more detailed computations, using new information about the nature of supernovae and the distances of these events to describe in more detail the sorts of effects that are indicated at the Earth. This short communication/review is designed to describe some of these effects so that they may possibly be related to changes in the biota around these times.
Distances are found for four supernova remnants without previous distance measurements. H I spectra and H I channel maps are used to determine the maximum velocity of H I absorption for the four supernova remnants (SNRs). We examined $^{13}$CO emission spectra and channel maps to look for possible molecular gas associated with each SNR, but did not find any. The resulting distances for the SNRs are $3.5 \pm 0.2$ kpc (G24.7+0.6), $4.7 \pm 0.3$ kpc (G29.6+0.1), $4.1 \pm 0.5$ kpc (G41.5+0.4) and $4.5 \pm 0 .4 - 9.0 \pm 0.4$ kpc (G57.2+0.8).
The Supernova Neutrino Amino Acid Processing model, which uses electron anti-neutrinos and the magnetic field from a source object such as a supernova to selectively destroy one amino acid chirality, is studied for possible sites that would produce meteoroids having partially left-handed amino acids. Several sites appear to provide the requisite magnetic field intensities and electron anti-neutrino fluxes. These results have obvious implications for the origin of life on Earth.
Recent high energy gamma-ray observations of both single supernova remnants and superbubbles, together with observations of supernovae, star formation regions, and local cosmic ray composition, now provide an integrated framework tying together the sources, injection, acceleration and propagation of the cosmic rays, so that it is possible to determine their relative contributions to cosmic ray acceleration for all but the very highest energies.
On 21 April 2018, the citizens of Wako, Japan, interacted in a novel way with research being carried out at the Astrophysical Big Bang Laboratory (ABBL) at RIKEN. They were able to explore a model of a supernova and its remnant in an immersive three-dimentional format by using virtual reality (VR) technology. In this article, we explain how this experience was developed and delivered to the public, providing practical tips for and reflecting on the successful organisation of an event of this kind.
Imaging surveys will find many tens to hundreds of thousands of Type Ia supernovae in the next decade, and measure their light curves. In addition to a need for characterizing their types and subtypes, a redshift is required to place them on a Hubble diagram to map the cosmological expansion. We investigate the requirements on redshift systematics control in order not to bias cosmological results, in particular dark energy parameter estimation. We find that additive and multiplicative systematics must be constrained at the few$\,\times 10^{-3}$ level, effectively requiring spectroscopic followup for robust use of photometric supernovae. Catastrophic outliers need control at the subpercent level. We also investigate sculpting the spectroscopic sample.
We study the hydrodynamic evolution of an explosion close to the stellar surface, and give predictions for the radiation from such an event. We show that such an event will give rise to a multi-wavelength transient. We apply this model to describe a precursor burst to the peculiar supernova iPTF14hls, which occurred in 1954, sixty year before the supernova. We propose that the new generation of optical surveys might detect similar transients, and they can be used to identify supernova progenitors well before the explosion.
Machine Learning methods will play a fundamental role in our ability to optimize the science output from the next generation of large scale surveys. Given the peculiarities of astronomical data, it is crucial that algorithms are adapted to the data situation at hand. In this comment, I review the recent efforts towards the development of automatic systems to identify and classify supernova with the goal of enabling their use as cosmological standard candles.
We present an online application, the SuperNova Interactive Fitter (SNIF), which can be used to interactively fit one-zone, analytical models to optical transient light curves powered by (1) the radioactive decay of 56Ni, (2) the spin-down of newly born magnetars, or (3) the interaction between supernova ejecta and pre-existing circumstellar material. This application utilizes the Open Astronomy Catalogs API to connect the user to thousands of publicly available transient light curves from the literature.
This short note records an unusual situation with some Google Scholar's profiles that imply the existence of "supernovae" articles, i.e., articles whose impact -- in terms of number of citations -- in a single year gets (almost) an order of magnitude higher than the previous year and immediate drops (and remains steady) to a very low level after the next year. We analyse the issue and resolve the situation providing an answer whether there exist supernovae articles.
The Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background (DSNB) in the MeV regime represents the cumulative cosmic neutrino emission, predominantly due to core collapse supernovae. We estimate the DSNB flux for different Star Formation Rate Density (SFRD) models. We find that the DSNB flux estimated using the SFRD derived from Fermi-LAT Collaboration et al. (2018) is significantly higher ($\approx$ 32$\%$) relative to the flux estimated using the SFRD from Madau & Fragos (2017). This depicts the sensitivity between the DSNB flux and the SFRD estimates which shows that future detection of the DSNB can be used as a valuable tool to constrain the SFRD.
Condensed Abstract: We present an extensive study of the inception of supernova explosions by following the evolution of the cores of two massive stars (15 Msun and 25 Msun) in two dimensions. Our calculations begin at the onset of core collapse and stop several 100 ms after the bounce, at which time successful explosions of the appropriate magnitude have been obtained. (...) Guided by our numerical results, we have developed a paradigm for the supernova explosion mechanism. We view a supernova as an open cycle thermodynamic engine in which a reservoir of low-entropy matter (the envelope) is thermally coupled and physically connected to a hot bath (the protoneutron star) by a neutrino flux, and by hydrodynamic instabilities. (...) In essence, a Carnot cycle is established in which convection allows out-of-equilibrium heat transfer mediated by neutrinos to drive low entropy matter to higher entropy and therefore extracts mechanical energy from the heat generated by gravitational collapse. We argue that supernova explosions are nearly guaranteed and self-regulated by the high efficiency of the thermodynamic engine. (...) Convection continues to accumulate energy exterior to the neutron star until a successful explosion has occurred. At this time, the envelope is expelled and therefore uncoupled from the heat source (the neutron star) and the energy input ceases. This paradigm does not invoke new or modified physics over previous treatments, but relies on compellingly straightforward thermodynamic arguments. It provides a robust and self-regulated explosion mechanism to power supernovae which is effective under a wide range of physical parameters.
We investigate in this paper the core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism in both one and two dimensions. We verify the usefulness of neutrino-driven overturn (``convection'') between the shock and the neutrinosphere in igniting the supernova explosion. The 2-D simulation of the core of a 15$\mdot$ star that we present here indicates that the breaking of spherical symmetry may be central to the explosion itself and that a multitude of bent and broken fingers is a common feature of the ejecta. In 2-D, the steady-state shock radius is larger than its value in 1-D by 30\%--100\%. The critical condition for explosion is thereby relaxed. Since supernovae are driven by neutrino heating, they are coronal phenomena, akin to winds, though initially bounded by an accretion tamp. Neutrino energy is pumped into the supernova during the shock's propagation through the inner many thousands of kilometers and not instantaneously. Curiously, just after the explosion is triggered, the matter that will eventually be ejected is still bound. The high-speed fingers that emerge from the core seem a natural explanation for the nickel bullets seen in 87A and the shrapnel inferred in some supernova remnants. Within 100 ms of the explosion, a strong, neutrino-driven wind is blowing outward from the protoneutron star.
Multiwavelength observations of Type II supernovae have shown evidence for the interaction of supernovae with the dense slow winds from the red supergiant progenitor stars. Observations of planetary nebulae and the nebula around SN 1987A show that the slow winds from extended stars frequently have an axisymme- tric structure with a high density in the equatorial plane. We have carried out numerical calculations of the interaction of a supernova with such an axisymme- tric density distribution. For small values of the angular density gradient at the pole, the asymmetry in the interaction shell is greater than, but close to, that expected from purely radial motion. If the angular density gradient is above a moderate value, the flow qualitatively changes and a protrusion emerges along the axis. For a power-law supernova density profile, the flow approaches a self-similar state in which the protrusion length is $2-4$ times the radius of the main shell. The critical density gradient is larger for steeper density profiles of the ejecta. Most of our calculations are axisymmetric, but we have carried out a 3-dimensional calculation to show that the protrusion is not a numerical artifact along the symmetry axis. For typical supernova parameters, the protrusions take $\gtrsim$ several years to develop. The appearance of the shell with protrusions is similar to that observed in VLBI radio images of the remnant 41.9 +58 in M82 and, possibly, of SN 1986J. We also considered the possibility of asymmetric ejecta and found that it had a relatively small effect on the asymmetry of the interaction region.
We have made polarimetric observations of three Type Ia supernovae (SN Ia) and two type II supernovae (SN II). No significant polarization was detected for any of the SN Ia down to the level of 0.2\%, while polarization of order $1.0\%$ was detected for the two SN II 1994Y and 1995H. A catalog of all the SNe with polarization data is compiled that shows a distinct trend that all the 5 SN II with sufficient polarimetric data show polarizations at about 1\%, while none of the 9 SN Ia in the sample show intrinsic polarization. This systematic difference in polarization of supernovae, if confirmed, raises many interesting questions concerning the mechanisms leading to supernova explosions. Our observations enhance the use of SN Ia as tools for determining the distance scale through various techniques, but suggest that one must be very cautious in utilizing Type II for distance determinations. However, we caution that the link between the asphericity of a supernova and the measured ``intrinsic'' polarization is complicated by reflected light from the circumstellar material and the intervening interstellar material, the so-called light echo. This effect may contribute more substantially to SN II than to SN Ia. The tight limits on polarization of SN Ia may constrain progenitor models with extensive scattering nebulae such as symbiotic stars and other systems of extensive mass loss.
We present the first measurement of the rate of Type Ia supernovae at high redshift. The result is derived using a large subset of data from the Supernova Cosmology Project. Three supernovae were discovered in a surveyed area of 1.7 square degrees. The survey spanned a $\sim 3$ week baseline and used images with $3\sigma$ limiting magnitude of $R\sim 23$. We present our methods for estimating the numbers of galaxies and the number of solar luminosities to which the survey is sensitive, and the supernova detection efficiency which is used to determine the control time, the effective time for which the survey is sensitive to a Type Ia event. We derive a rest-frame Type Ia supernova rate at $z\sim0.4$ of $0.82\ {^{+0.54}_{-0.37}}\ {^{+0.37}_{-0.25}} $ $h^2$ SNu (1 SNu = 1 SN per century per $10^{10}$\Lbsun), where the first uncertainty is statistical and the second includes systematic effects. For the purposes of observers, we also determine the rate of SNe, per sky area surveyed, to be $ 34.4\ {^{+23.9}_{-16.2}}$ SNe\ $\rm year^{-1} deg^{-2}$ for SN magnitudes in the range $21.3 < R < 22.3$.
Distant supernovae can now be detected routinely. To date 34 supernovae at $z > 0.1$ have been discovered. Among them are 12 Type~Ia supernovae confirmed spectroscopically and suited to measure the cosmic deceleration when appropriately employed as standard candles. However, peak magnitudes have been determined for only two objects so far and a determination of $q_0$ is not yet possible. We describe the current status of the searches and possible pitfalls of the method which rests on few basic assumptions. The importance of sufficient information on the distant events is stressed and the observations of SN~1995K are used as an example of the detailed procedures employed in the analysis. Only spectroscopic classification and light curves in at least two filter bands provide the basis to use correction schemes for the luminosity which have successfully been established in nearby samples. Time dilation has been detected acting on the light curve of SN~1995K at a redshift of 0.478, providing clear evidence of universal expansion. The observations are fully consistent with local Type Ia supernovae in an expanding universe but incompatible with the expectations from a static universe. The contributions of the new, large telescopes to this research area are described. The extension of the observations to even more distant objects will provide a better leverage to distinguish between the possible decelerations and the inclusion of Type II supernovae into the sample add an independent check on the cosmological distances.
Recent evidence on the metal content of the high-redshift Lyman alpha forest seen in quasar spectra suggests that an early generation of galaxies enriched the intergalactic medium (IGM) at z ~ 5. We calculate the number of supernovae that need to have taken place to produce the observed metallicity. The progenitor stars of the supernovae should have emitted $\sim 20$ ionizing photons for each baryon in the universe, i.e., more than enough to ionize the IGM. We calculate that the rate of these supernovae is such that about one of them should be observable at any time per square arc minute. Their fluxes are, of course, extremely faint: at z=5, the peak magnitude should be K=27 with a duration of ~ 1 year. However, these supernovae should still be the brightest objects in the universe beyond some redshift, because the earliest galaxies should form before quasars and they should have very low mass, so their luminosities should be much lower than that of a supernova.   We also show that, under the assumption of a standard initial mass function, a significant fraction of the stars in the Galactic halo should have formed in the early galaxies that reionized and enriched the IGM, and which later must have merged with our Galaxy. These stars should have a more extended radial distribution than the observed halo stars.
The observation of neutrinos from Supernova 1987A has confirmed the theoretical conjecture that these particles play a crucial role during the collapse of the core of a massive star. Only one per cent of the energy they carry away from the newly formed neutron star may account for all the kinetic and electromagnetic energy responsible for the spectacular display of the supernova explosion. However, the neutrinos emitted from the collapsed stellar core at the center of the explosion couple so weakly to the surrounding matter that convective processes behind the supernova shock and/or inside the nascent neutron star might be required to increase the efficiency of the energy transfer to the stellar mantle and envelope. The conditions for a successful explosion by the neutrino-heating mechanism and the possible importance of convection in and around the neutron star are shortly discussed. Neutrino-driven explosions turn out to be very sensitive to the parameters describing the neutrino emission of the proto-neutron star and to the details of the dynamical processes in the collapsed stellar core. Therefore uniform explosions with a well defined energy seem unlikely and type-II supernova explosions do not offer promising perspectives for being useful as standard candles.
We present UBVRI light curves for the bright Type Ia supernovae SN 1990N in NGC 4639 and SN 1991T in NGC 4527 based on photometry gathered in the course of the Calan/Tololo supernova program. Both objects have well-sampled light curves starting several days before maximum light and spanning well through the exponential tail. These data supercede the preliminary photometry published by Leibundgut et al (1991) and Phillips et al (1992). The host galaxies for these supernovae have (or will have) accurate distances based on the Cepheid period-luminosity relationship. The photometric data in this paper provide template curves for the study of general population of Type Ia supernova and accurate photometric indices needed for the Cepheid-supernova distance scale.
Long-term monitoring of the radio emission from supernovae with the Very Large Array (VLA) shows that the radio ``light curves'' evolve in a systematic fashion with a distinct peak flux density (and thus, in combination with a distance, a peak spectral luminosity) at each frequency and a well-defined time from explosion to that peak. Studying these two quantities at 6 cm wavelength, peak spectral luminosity (L_{6 cm peak}) and time after explosion date (t_0) to reach that peak (t_{6 cm peak} - t_0), we find that they appear related. In particular, based on two objects, Type Ib supernovae may be approximate radio ``standard candles'' with a 6 cm peak luminosity L_{6 cm peak} \approx 19.9 X 10^{26} erg s^{-1} Hz^{-1}; also based on two objects, Type Ic supernovae may be approximate radio ``standard candles'' with a 6 cm peak luminosity L_{6 cm peak} \approx 6.5 X 10^{26} erg s^{-1} Hz^{-1}; and, based on twelve objects, Type II supernovae appear to obey a relation L_{6 cm peak} \simeq 5.5 X 10^{23} (t_{6 cm peak} - t_0)^{1.4} erg s^{-1} Hz^{-1}, with time measured in days. If these relations are supported by further observations, they provide a means for determining distances to supernovae, and thus to their parent galaxies, from purely radio continuum observations.
This review concentrates on nucleosynthesis processes in general and their applications to massive stars and supernovae. A brief initial introduction is given to the physics in astrophysical plasmas which governs composition changes. We present the basic equations for thermonuclear reaction rates and nuclear reaction networks. The required nuclear physics input for reaction rates is discussed, i.e. cross sections for nuclear reactions, photodisintegrations, electron and positron captures, neutrino captures, inelastic neutrino scattering, and beta-decay half-lives. We examine especially the present state of uncertainties in predicting thermonuclear reaction rates, while the status of experiments is discussed by others in this volume (see M. Wiescher). It follows a brief review of hydrostatic burning stages in stellar evolution before discussing the fate of massive stars, i.e. the nucleosynthesis in type II supernova explosions (SNe II). Except for SNe Ia, which are explained by exploding white dwarfs in binary stellar systems (which will not be discussed here), all other supernova types seem to be linked to the gravitational collapse of massive stars (M$>$8M$_\odot$) at the end of their hydrostatic evolution. SN1987A, the first type II supernova for which the progenitor star was known, is used as an example for nucleosynthesis calculations. Finally, we discuss the production of heavy elements in the r-process up to Th and U and its possible connection to supernovae.
Supernova SN 1998bw exploded in the same direction and at the same time as the gamma-ray burst GRB 980425. Here we report radio observations of this type Ic supernova, beginning 4 days after the gamma-ray burst. At its peak the radio source is the most luminous ever seen from a supernova, nu L_nu = 4 x 10^38 erg/s at 5 GHz. More remarkably, the traditional synchrotron interpretation of the radio emission requires that the radio source be expanding at an apparent velocity of at least twice the speed of light, indicating that this supernova was accompanied by a shock wave moving at relativistic speed. The energy U_e associated with the radio-emitting relativistic electrons must lie between 10^49 erg <U_e< 10^52 erg, and thus represents a significant fraction of the total kinetic energy ~10^51 erg associated with supernova explosions. The presence of a relativistic shock in SN 1998bw suggests a physical connection with the gamma-ray burst GRB 980425. We argue that this represents a second class of gamma-ray burst, with much lower emitted energy ~10^48 erg in gamma-rays than the two powerful ~10^53 erg high-redshift gamma-ray bursts previously identified.
Hot, X-ray emitting gaseous halos around massive elliptical galaxies are a result of both stellar mass loss and inflow toward the overdensity from which giant ellipticals and their associated galaxy groups formed. The metal abundance in this gas contains important information about early star formation and past supernova activity. We find that Type II supernovae based on a Salpeter IMF, plus a small number of additional Type Ia supernovae, can explain the the density, temperature and abundance profiles currently observed in gaseous halos around massive ellipticals. Within the central, optically bright regions of luminous ellipticals, approximately half of the interstellar iron is produced by Type Ia supernovae and half by mass lost from evolving stars which were originally enriched by Type II supernovae. However, iron and silicon abundances in the intracluster gas within rich clusters suggest enrichment by a larger number of supernovae per unit optical light than we require for massive ellipticals, either more Type Ia or more Type II from a flatter IMF. Since the enrichment histories of massive ellipticals and rich clusters are fundamentally different, E and SO galaxies may not be the only sources of metal enrichment in rich cluster gas.
By comparing relative rates of supernovae versus formation rates of single radio pulsars, recycled pulsars, binary pulsars and X-ray binaries we put strong limits on the progenitors of radio pulsars and on the requirement of an asymmetry in the supernova. The assumption that radio pulsars are only formed in type Ib and type Ic supernovae from interacting binaries (Iben & Tutukov 1996) breaks down on the implication that in that case either the formation rate of binary pulsars (double neutron stars) should be of the order of 20%, of the single pulsar birthrate or, alternatively, almost all single pulsars (85% to 98%) should originate from Thorne-Zytkow stars. In the latter case the pulsar velocity distribution is inconsistent with observations. Also, in that case the difference between the supernova rate and the pulsar formation rate would be about one order of magnitude, i.e.: much larger than observed.   Allowing type II supernovae from single stars and non-interacting binaries to form radio pulsars solves this conundrum, but then a kick is required in order to explain the high velocities of single radio pulsars. A kick is also required to understand the small birthrate, relative to the supernova rate, of binary pulsars consisting of two neutron stars.
Study of the polarization of supernovae has suggested that the core collapse process may be intrinsically strongly asymmetric. There is a tentative trend for supernova with smaller envelopes showing more polarization, with Type Ic having the smallest envelopes and showing the largest polarization. The recent discovery of the unusual supernova SN 1998bw and its apparent correlation with the gamma-ray burst GRB~980425 has raised new issues concerning both the gamma-ray bursts and supernovae. SN 1998bw resembled a Type Ic, but was unusually bright at maximum light in the optical and radio, and its expansion velocities were large. This makes SN 1998bw a possible candidate for a "hypernova" with explosion energies exceeding 10^52 erg. We show that the light curve of SN 1998bw can be understood as the result of viewing an aspherical explosion roughly along the symmetry axis of an exploding, non-degenerate C/O core of a massive star with a kinetic energy of 2x10^51 erg, a total ejecta mass of 2 solar masses, and a nickel-56 mass of 0.2 solar masses. In this model, the high expansion velocities are a direct consequence of the aspherical explosion which, in turn, produces oblate iso-density contours and that accounts for the polarization. It is not yet clear how either the hypernovae or these asymmetric models can produce gamma-ray bursts.
The locations of supernovae in the local stellar and gaseous environment in galaxies contain important clues to their progenitor stars. Access to this information, however, has been hampered by the limited resolution achieved by ground-based observations. High spatial resolution Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images of galaxy fields in which supernovae had been observed can improve the situation considerably. We have examined the immediate environments of a few dozen supernovae using archival post-refurbishment HST images. Although our analysis is limited due to signal-to-noise ratio and filter bandpass considerations, the images allow us for the first time to resolve individual stars in, and to derive detailed color-magnitude diagrams for, several environments. We are able to place more rigorous constraints on the masses of these supernovae. A search was made for late-time emission from supernovae in the archival images, and for the progenitor stars in presupernova images of the host galaxies. We have detected SN 1986J in NGC 891 and, possibly, SN 1981K in NGC 4258. We have also identified the progenitor of the Type IIn SN 1997bs in NGC 3627. By removing younger resolved stars in the environments of SNe Ia, we can measure the colors of the unresolved stellar background and attribute these colors generally to an older, redder population. HST images ``accidentally'' caught the Type Ia SN 1994D in NGC 4526 shortly after its outburst; we measure its brightness. Finally, we add to the statistical inferences that can be made from studying the association of SNe with recent star-forming regions.
There are at least three ways in which a varying gravitational constant $G$ could affect the interpretation of the recent high-redhisft Type Ia supernovae results. If the local value of $G$ at the space-time location of distant supernovae is different, it would change both the thermonuclear energy release and the time scale of the supernova outburst. In both cases the effect is related to a change in the Chandrasekhar mass $M_{\rm Ch}\propto G^{-3/2}$. Moreover the integrated variation of $G$ with time would also affect cosmic evolution and therefore the luminosity distance relation. Here we investigate in a consistent way how these different effects of a varying $G$ could change the current interpretation of the Hubble diagram of Type Ia supernovae. We parametrize the variation of $G$ using scalar-tensor theories of gravity, such as the Jordan-Brans-Dicke theory or its extensions. It is remarkable that Dirac's hypothesis that $G$ should decrease with time can qualitatively explain the observed $\Delta m \simeq 0.2$ mag decrease at $z\simeq 0.5$ (with respect to a decelerating universe) and, at the same time, reduce the duration of the risetimes of distant Type Ia supernovae as recently reported.
One method of discriminating between the many Type Ia progenitor scenarios is by searching for contaminating hydrogen and helium stripped from the companion star. We present several high-resolution 2-D numerical simulations of the impact of a Type Ia supernova explosion with hydrogen-rich main sequence, subgiant, and red giant companions. The binary parameters were chosen to represent several classes of single-degenerate Type Ia progenitor models that have been suggested in the literature. We use realistic stellar models and supernova debris profiles to represent each binary system. For each scenario, we explore the hydrodynamics of the supernova-secondary interaction, calculate the amount of stellar material stripped from the secondary and the kick delivered by the impact, and construct the velocity and solid angle distributions of the stripped material. After the impact, the main sequence star is puffed up, much like a pre-main sequence star. The subgiant companion behaves similarly. The secondary will not be contaminated by much supernova debris from the initial impact, but it may accrete low-velocity iron-group elements (or oxygen and silicon if the ejecta is radially mixed) at late times. A He pre-white dwarf will be left behind after a supernova explosion with a red giant companion.
We here propose a two-step model for gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) associated with supernovae. In the first step, the core collapse of a star with mass $\ge 19M_\odot$ leads to a massive neutron star and a normal supernova, and subsequently hypercritical accretion of the neutron star from the supernova ejecta may give rise to a jet through neutrino annihilation and/or Poynting flux along the stellar rotation axis. However, because of too much surrounding matter, this jet rapidly enters a nonrelativistic phase and evolves to a large bubble. In the second step, the neutron star promptly implodes to a rapidly rotating black hole surrounded by a torus when the mass of the star increases to the maximum mass and meanwhile its rotation frequency increases to the upper limit due to the accreted angular momentum. The gravitational binding energy of the torus may be dissipated by a magnetized relativistic wind, which may then be absorbed by the supernova ejecta, thus producing an energetic hypernova. The rotational energy of the black hole may be extracted by the Blandford-Znajek's mechanism, leading to another jet. This jet is relatively free of baryons and thus may be accelerated to an ultrarelativistic phase because the first jet has pushed out of its front matter and left a baryon-free exit. We expect that the second jet generates a GRB and its afterglow. Our two-step model may alleviate the baryon-contamination problem suffered possibly from in the hypernova models. Furthermore, this model not only accounts for association of several GRBs with supernovae but also explains well the features of the afterglows of these bursts.
There is growing evidence that long and hard gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), discovered at redshifts between 0.4 and 3.4, are related to some type of supernova (SN) explosions. The GRB ejecta are ultra-relativistic, and possibly beamed. There is a possibility that some SN ejecta are also beamed and/or relativistic. Prospects for farther advances guided by expected and unexpected observational developments are very good. The prospects for developing a sound and quantitative GRB theory any time soon are rather modest, if histories of quasars, radio pulsars and supernovae are used for reference. However, the current progress in the understanding of GRB afterglows (which are relativistic) and remnants (which are non-relativistic) is likely to continue, as these appear to be simpler than the GRBs.   According to the current analysis of GRB 970508 the energy of gamma rays released by this event was about the same as the total energy of explosion. If correct, this result is difficult to reconcile with the internal shock models. It also implies that the global energy generation rate by GRBs is four orders of magnitude lower than the rate due to ordinary supernovae, which makes it very unlikely that the highly energetic supernova remnants were created by GRBs.
We present BeppoSAX follow-up observations of GRB980425 obtained with the Narrow Field Instruments (NFI) in April, May, and November 1998. The first NFI observation has detected within the 8' radius error box of the GRB an X-ray source positionally consistent with the supernova 1998bw, which exploded within a day of GRB980425, and a fainter X-ray source, not consistent with the position of the supernova. The former source is detected in the following NFI pointings and exhibits a decline of a factor of two in six months. If it is associated with SN 1998bw, this is the first detection of X-ray emission from a Type I supernova above 2 keV. The latter source exhibits only marginally significant variability. The X-ray spectra and variability of the supernova are compared with thermal and non-thermal models of supernova high energy emission. Based on the BeppoSAX data, it is not possible to firmly establish which of the two detected sources is the GRB X-ray counterpart, although probability considerations favor the supernova.
We present the discovery observations of the optical counterpart of the gamma-ray burster GRB990712 taken 4.16 hours after the outburst and discuss its light curve observed in the V, R and I bands during the first ~35 days after the outburst. The observed light curves were fitted with a power-law decay for the optical transient (OT), plus an additional component which was treated in two different ways. First, the additional component was assumed to be an underlying galaxy of constant brightness. The resulting slope of the decay is 0.97+/-0.05 and the magnitudes of the underlying galaxy are: V = 22.3 +/- 0.05, R = 21.75 +/- 0.05 and I = 21.35 +/- 0.05. Second, the additional component was assumed to be a galaxy plus an underlying supernova with a time-variable brightness identical to that of GRB980425, appropriately scaled to the redshift of GRB990712. The resulting slope of the decay is similar, but the goodness-of-fit is worse which would imply that either this GRB is not associated with an underlying supernova or the underlying supernova is much fainter than the supernova associated with GRB980425. The galaxy in this case is fainter: V = 22.7 +/- 0.05, R = 22.25 +/- 0.05 and I = 22.15 +/- 0.05; and the OT plus the underlying supernova at a given time is brighter. Measurements of the brightnesses of the OT and the galaxy by late-time HST observation and ground-based observations can thus assess the presence of an underlying supernova.
X-ray observations of hot gas in galaxy groups indicate higher entropies than can be achieved in the accretion shocks as it fell into the dark halos. It has been proposed that this entropy excess results from some universal external heating process in the early universe - AGN, population III stars, etc. - that occurred before most of the gas entered the dark halos. Alternatively, the hot gas in groups may be heated internally by Type II supernovae when the galactic stars formed. We investigate here the gas-dynamical consequences of various amounts of external, high redshift heating and compare with internal supernova heating. Radiative losses and distributed mass dropout are included. We find that externally heated flows are unsatisfactory; when the heating is high enough to bring the X-ray luminosities into agreement with observations, the gas entropy is too high. Flows internally heated by Type II supernovae are preferred. Our results are insensitive to the epoch and spatial distribution of the supernova heating process. However, with a Salpeter IMF a large fraction of the energy produced by supernovae must heat the hot gas. Alternatively, only about 20 percent of the Type II supernova energy would be required to heat the gas if the initial mass function is flatter than Salpeter, as suggested by stellar mass to light ratios.
We calculate the type Ia supernova rate for different star formation histories in galaxies by adopting the most popular and recent progenitor models. We show that the timescale for the maximum in the type Ia supernova rate, which corresponds also to time of the maximum enrichment, is not unique but is a strong function of the adopted stellar lifetimes, initial mass function and star formation rate. This timescale varies from $\sim 40-50$ Myr for an instantaneous starburst to $\sim$ 0.3 Gyr for a typical elliptical galaxy to $\sim 4.0-5.0$ Gyr for a disk of a spiral Galaxy like the Milky Way. We also show that the typical timescale of 1 Gyr, often quoted as the typical timescale for the type Ia supernovae, is just the time at which, in the solar neighbourhood, the Fe production from supernovae Ia starts to become important and not the time at which SNe Ia start to explode. As a cosequence of this, a change in slope in the [O/Fe] ratio is expected in correspondance of this timescale. We conclude that the suggested lack of supernovae Ia at low metallicities produces results at variance with the observed [O/Fe] vs. [Fe/H] relation in the solar region. We also compute the supernova Ia rates for different galaxies as a function of redshift and predict an extended maximum between redshift $z \sim 3.6$ and $z \sim 1.6$ for elliptical galaxies, and two maxima, one at $z \sim 3$ and the other at $z \sim 1$, for spiral galaxies, under the assumption that galaxies start forming stars at $z_f \sim 5$ and $\Omega_M = 0.3$, $\Omega_{\Lambda} = 0.7$.
We present calculations of the radio emission from supernovae based on high-resolution simulations of the hydrodynamics and radiation transfer, using simple energy density relations which link the properties of the radiating electrons and the magnetic field to the hydrodynamics. As a specific example we model the emission from SN1993J, which cannot be adequately fitted with the often-used analytic mini-shell model, and present a good fit to the radio evolution at a single frequency. Both free-free absorption and syncrotron self- absorption are needed to fit the light curve at early times and a circumstellar density profile of rho~r^-1.7 provides the best fit to the later data. We show that the interaction of density structures in the ejecta with the reverse supernova shock may produce features in the radio light curves such as have been observed. We discuss the use of high-resolution radio images of supernovae to distinguish between different absorption mechanisms and determine the origin of specific light curve features. Comparisons of VLBI images of SN1993J with synthetic model images suggest that internal free-free absorption completely obscures emission at 8.4 GHz passing through the center of the supernova for the first few tens of years after explosion. We predict that at 8.4 GHz the internal free-free absorption is currently declining, and that over the next 40 years the surface brightness of the center of the source should increase relative to the bright ring of emission seen in VLBI images. Similar absorption in a nearby supernova would make the detection of a radio pulsar at 1 GHz impossible for ~150 years after explosion.
Recent high-redshift Type Ia supernovae results can be used to set new bounds on a possible variation of the gravitational constant $G$. If the local value of $G$ at the space-time location of distant supernovae is different, it would change both the kinetic energy release and the amount of $^{56}$Ni synthesized in the supernova outburst. Both effects are related to a change in the Chandrasekhar mass $M_{Ch} \propto G^{-3/2}$. In addition, the integrated variation of $G$ with time would also affect the cosmic evolution and therefore the luminosity distance relation. We show that the later effect in the magnitudes of Type Ia supernovae is typically several times smaller than the change produced by the corresponding variation of the Chandrasekhar mass. We investigate in a consistent way how a varying $G$ could modify the Hubble diagram of Type Ia supernovae and how these results can be used to set upper bounds to a hypothetical variation of $G$. We find $G/G_0 \la 1.1$ and $G'/G \la 10^{-11} yr^{-1}$ at redshifts $z\simeq 0.5$. These new bounds extend the currently available constrains on the evolution of $G$ all the way from solar and stellar distances to typical scales of Gpc/Gyr, i.e. by more than 15 orders of magnitudes in time and distance.
Two groups recently deduced the positive value for the cosmological constant, concluding at a high (>= 99%) confidence level that the Universe should be accelerating. This conclusion followed from the statistical analysis of dozens of high-redshift supernovae. In this paper this conclusion is discussed. From the conservative frequentist's point of view the validity of null hypothesis of the zero cosmological constant is tested by the classical statistical chi^2 test for the 60 supernovae listed in Perlmutter et al. 1999 (ApJ, 517, 565). This sample contains 42 objects discovered in the frame of Supernova Cosmology Project and 18 low-redshift object detected earlier. Excluding the event SN1997O, which is doubtlessly an outlier, one obtains the result: The probability for seeing a worse chi^2 - if the null hypothesis is true - is in the 5% to 8% range, a value that does not indicate significant evidence againts the null. If one excludes further five possible outliers, proposed to be done by Perlmutter et al. 1999, then the sample of 54 supernovae is in an excellent accordance with the null hypothesis. It also seems that upernovae from the High-z Supernova Search Team does not change the acceptance of null hypothesis. This means that the rejection of the Einstein equations with zero cosmological constant - based on the supernova data alone - is still premature.
I use photometry and spectroscopy data for 24 Type II plateau supernovae to examine their observed and physical properties. This dataset shows that these objects encompass a wide range of ~5 mag in their plateau luminosities, their expansion velocities vary by x5, and the nickel masses produced in these explosions go from 0.0016 to 0.26 Mo. From a subset of 16 objects I find that the explosion energies vary between 0.6x and 5.5x10^51 ergs, the ejected masses encompass the range 14-56 Mo, and the progenitors' radii go from 80 to 600 Ro. Despite this great diversity several regularities emerge, which reveal that there is a continuum in the properties of these objects from the faint, low-energy, nickel-poor SNe 1997D and 1999br, to the bright, high-energy, nickel-rich SN 1992am. This study provides evidence that more massive progenitors produce more energetic explosions, thus suggesting that the outcome of the core collapse is somewhat determined by the envelope mass. I find also that supernovae with greater energies produce more nickel. Similar relationships appear to hold for Type Ib/c supernovae, which suggests that both Type II and Type Ib/c supernovae share the same core physics. When the whole sample of core collapse objects is considered, there is a continous distribution of energies below 8x10^51 ergs. Far above in energy scale and nickel production lies the extreme hypernova 1998bw, the only supernova firmly associated to a GRB.
The type IIn SN 1998S is one of the most remarkable core-collapse supernovae ever observed. It underwent a complex interaction with a substantial circumstellar medium, resulting in radiation at wavelengths from radio to X-rays. IR and optical observations have revealed a wide variety of broad and narrow emission lines. Examination of the SN/CSM interaction and of the ejecta spectra has allowed us to deduce that the supernova probably arose from a massive, RSG progenitor having a large (>3200 AU radius), dusty circumstellar disk. SN 1998S also developed one of the strongest, most persistent infrared excesses ever seen in a supernova. IR/optical monitoring of SN 1998S has been carried out to nearly 1200 days post-explosion. This includes coverage to wavelengths as long as 4.7 microns, making SN 1998S only the second supernova (after SN 1987A) to be observed in this spectral region. Fading of the central and redshifted components of the late-time H I and He I line profiles suggests strongly that dust condensed in the ejecta. However, it is less clear whether the strong late-time IR emission arose from this dust, or from an IR echo in the dusty CSM. One interesting possibility is that dust condensed in the cool dense shell between the outer and reverse shocks, thus simultaneously producing both the line obscuration and the IR emission.
(Abridged) We present results from dynamical models of core-collapse supernovae in one spatial dimension, employing a newly-developed Boltzmann neutrino radiation transport algorithm, coupled to Lagrangean hydrodynamics and a consistent high-density nuclear equation of state. We focus on shock breakout and its neutrino signature and follow the dynamical evolution of the cores of 11 M_sun, 15 M_sun, and 20 M_sun progenitors through collapse and the first 250 milliseconds after bounce. We examine the effects on the emergent neutrino spectra, light curves, and mix of species of artificial opacity changes, the number of energy groups, the weak magnetism/recoil corrections, nucleon-nucleon bremsstrahlung, neutrino-electron scattering, and the compressibility of nuclear matter. Furthermore, we present the first high-resolution look at the angular distribution of the neutrino radiation field both in the semi-transparent regime and at large radii and explore the accuracy with which our tangent-ray method tracks the free propagation of a pulse of radiation in a near vacuum. Finally, we fold the emergent neutrino spectra with the efficiencies and detection processes for a selection of modern underground neutrino observatories and argue that the prompt electron-neutrino breakout burst from the next galactic supernova is in principle observable and usefully diagnostic of fundamental collapse/supernova behavior. Though we are not in this study focusing on the supernova mechanism per se, our simulations support the theoretical conclusion (already reached by others) that spherical (1D) supernovae do not explode when good physics and transport methods are employed.
(Abridged) Many dwarf galaxies exhibit sub-Solar metallicities, with some star-to-star variation, despite often containing multiple generations of stars. The total metal content in these systems is much less than expected from the heavy element production of massive stars in each episode of star formation. Such a deficiency implies that a substantial fraction of the enriched material has been lost from these small galaxies. Mass ejection from dwarf galaxies may have important consequences for the evolution of the intergalactic medium and for the evolution of massive galaxies, which themselves may have formed via the merger of smaller systems. We report here the results of three-dimensional simulations of the evolution of supernova-enriched gas within dwarf spheroidal galaxies (dSph's), with the aim of determining the retention efficiency of supernova ejecta. We consider two galaxy models, selected to represent opposite ends of the dSph sequence. For each model galaxy we investigate a number of scenarios, ranging from a single supernova in smooth gas distributions to more complex multiple supernovae in highly disturbed gas distributions. The results of these investigations suggest that, for low star-formation efficiencies, it is difficult to completely expel the enriched material from the galaxy. Most of the enriched gas is, however, lost from the core of the galaxy following multiple supernovae, especially if the interstellar medium is already highly disturbed by processes such as photo-ionization and stellar winds. If subsequent star formation occurs predominantly within the core where most of the residual gas is concentrated, then these results could explain the poor self-enrichment efficiency observed in dwarf galaxies.
We present early observations of the afterglow of the Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB) 030329 and the spectroscopic discovery of its associated supernova SN 2003dh. We obtained spectra of the afterglow of GRB 030329 each night from March 30.12 (0.6 days after the burst) to April 8.13 (UT) (9.6 days after the burst). The spectra cover a wavelength range of 350 nm to 850 nm. The early spectra consist of a power-law continuum (F_nu ~ nu^{-0.9}) with narrow emission lines originating from HII regions in the host galaxy, indicating a low redshift of z=0.1687. However, our spectra taken after 2003 Apr. 5 show broad peaks in flux characteristic of a supernova. Correcting for the afterglow emission, we find the spectrum of the supernova is remarkably similar to the type Ic `hypernova' SN 1998bw. While the presence of supernovae have been inferred from the light curves and colors of GRB afterglows in the past, this is the first direct, spectroscopic confirmation that a subset of classical gamma-ray bursts originate from supernovae.
We present extensive optical and infrared photometry of the afterglow of gamma-ray burst (GRB) 030329 and its associated supernova (SN) 2003dh over the first two months after detection (2003 March 30-May 29 UT). Optical spectroscopy from a variety of telescopes is shown and, when combined with the photometry, allows an unambiguous separation between the afterglow and supernova contributions. The optical afterglow of the GRB is initially a power-law continuum but shows significant color variations during the first week that are unrelated to the presence of a supernova. The early afterglow light curve also shows deviations from the typical power-law decay. A supernova spectrum is first detectable ~7 days after the burst and dominates the light after ~11 days. The spectral evolution and the light curve are shown to closely resemble those of SN 1998bw, a peculiar Type Ic SN associated with GRB 980425, and the time of the supernova explosion is close to the observed time of the GRB. It is now clear that at least some GRBs arise from core-collapse SNe.
We propose a simple model for the bolometric light curve of type Ia supernova exploding in a dense circumstellar (CS) envelope to describe the light curves of supernovae 2002ic and 1997cy. The modeling shows that at the radius $\sim7\times10^{15}$ cm the density of CS envelopes around both supernovae is similar. The mass of the CS envelope around SN 1997cy is close to $5 M_{\odot}$, while the characteristic time of the ejection of this envelope does not exceed 600 yr. We analyze two possible evolutionary scenarios which might lead to the explosion of type Ia supernova inside a dense CS envelope: accretion on CO white dwarf in the symbiotic binary and evolution of a single star with the initial mass of about $8 M_{\odot}$. If the conjecture about the explosion of type Ia supernova in a dense CS envelope is correct in the case of SN 2002ic and SN 1997cy then the rapid loss of the red supergiant envelope and the subsequent explosion of the CO white dwarf are synchronized by certain mechanism. This mechanism might be related to the contraction of the white dwarf as it approaches the Chandrasekhar limit. We show that formation of a (super)Chandrasekhar mass due to the merger of a CO white dwarf and CO core of a red supergiant with consequent explosion is unlikely, since it does not provide the required synchronization of the rapid mass loss and explosion.
We present a model of a pulsar wind nebula evolving inside its associated supernova remnant. The model uses a hydrodynamics code to simulate the evolution of this system when the pulsar has a high velocity. The simulation distinguishes four different stages of pulsar wind nebula evolution: the supersonic expansion stage, the reverse shock interaction stage, the subsonic expansion stage and ultimately the bow shock stage. The simulation bears out that, due to the high velocity of the pulsar, the position of the pulsar is off-centered with respect to its pulsar wind nebula, after the passage of the reverse shock. Subsequently the pulsar wind nebula expands subsonically untill the event of the bow shock formation, when the motion of the pulsar becomes supersonic. The bow shock formation event occurs at roughly half the crossing time, when the pulsar is positioned at 0.677 times the radius of the supernova remnant blastwave, in complete agreement with analytical predictions. The crossing time is defined by the age of the supernova remnant, when the pulsar overtakes the blastwave bounding the supernova remnant.   The results of the model are applied to three supernova remnants: N157B, G327.1-1.1 and W44. We argue that the head of the pulsar wind nebula, containing the active pulsar, inside the first two systems are not bounded by a bow shock. However, in the case of W44 we argue for a scenario in which the pulsar wind nebula is bounded by a bow shock, due to the supersonic motion of the pulsar.
Most of the proposed associations between magnetars and supernova remnant suffer from age problems. Usually, supernova remnants ages are determined from an approximation of the Sedov-Taylor phase relation between radius and age, for a fixed energy of the explosion ~ 10^{51} erg. Those ages do not generally agree with the characteristic ages of the (proposed) associated magnetars. We show quantitatively that, by taking into account the energy injected on the supernova remnant by magnetar spin-down, a faster expansion results, improving matches between characteristic ages and supernova remnants ages. However, the magnetar velocities inferred from observations would inviabilize some associations. Since characteristic ages may not be good age estimators, their influence on the likelihood of the association may not be as important.   In this work we present simple numerical simulations of supernova remnants expansion with internal magnetars, and apply it to the observed objects. A short initial spin period, thought to be important for the very generation of the magnetic field, is also relevant for the modified expansion of the remnant. We next analyze all proposed associations case-by-case, addressing the likelyhood of each one, according to this perspective. We consider a larger explosion energy and reasses the characteristic age issue, and conclude that about 50% of the associations can be true ones, provided SGRs and AXPs are magnetars.
The Kelvin-Helmholtz cooling epoch, lasting tens of seconds after the birth of a neutron star in a successful core-collapse supernova, is accompanied by a neutrino-driven wind. For magnetar-strength ($\sim10^{15}$ G) large scale surface magnetic fields, this outflow is magnetically-dominated during the entire cooling epoch.Because the strong magnetic field forces the wind to co-rotate with the protoneutron star,this outflow can significantly effect the neutron star's early angular momentum evolution, as in analogous models of stellar winds (e.g. Weber & Davis 1967). If the rotational energy is large in comparison with the supernova energy and the spindown timescale is short with respect to the time required for the supernova shockwave to traverse the stellar progenitor, the energy extracted may modify the supernova shock dynamics significantly. This effect is capable of producing hyper-energetic supernovae and, in some cases, provides conditions favorable for gamma ray bursts. We estimate spindown timescales for magnetized, rotating protoneutron stars and construct steady-state models of neutrino-magnetocentrifugally driven winds. We find that if magnetars are born rapidly rotating, with initial spin periods ($P$) of $\sim1$ millisecond, that of order $10^{51}-10^{52}$ erg of rotational energy can be extracted in $\sim10$ seconds. If magnetars are born slowly rotating ($P\gtrsim10$ ms) they can spin down to periods of $\sim1$ second on the Kelvin-Helmholtz timescale.
Type Ia supernovae have recently received considerable attention because it appears that they can be used as "standard candles" to measure cosmic distances out to billions of light years away from us. Observations of type Ia supernovae seem to indicate that we are living in a universe that started to accelerate its expansion when it was about half its present age. These conclusions rest primarily on phenomenological models which, however, lack proper theoretical understanding, mainly because the explosion process, initiated by thermonuclear fusion of carbon and oxygen into heavier elements, is difficult to simulate even on supercomputers. Here, we investigate a new way of modeling turbulent thermonuclear deflagration fronts in white dwarfs undergoing a type Ia supernova explosion. Our approach is based on a level set method which treats the front as a mathematical discontinuity and allows for full coupling between the front geometry and the flow field. New results of the method applied to the problem of type Ia supernovae are obtained. It is shown that in 2-D with high spatial resolution and a physically motivated subgrid scale model for the nuclear flames numerically "converged" results can be obtained, but for most initial conditions the stars do not explode. In contrast, simulations in 3-D, do give the desired explosions and many of their properties, such as the explosion energies, lightcurves and nucleosynthesis products, are in very good agreement with observed type Ia supernovae.
We present new pre-maximum and late-time optical photometry of the Type Ia/IIn supernova 2002ic. These observations are combined with the published V-band magnitudes of Hamuy et al. (2003) and the VLT spectrophotometry of Wang et al. (2004) to construct the most extensive light curve to date of this unusual supernova. The observed flux at late time is significantly higher relative to the flux at maximum than that of any other observed Type Ia supernova and continues to fade very slowly a year after explosion. Our analysis of the light curve suggests that a non-Type Ia supernova component becomes prominent $\sim20$ days after explosion. Modeling of the non-Type Ia supernova component as heating from the shock interaction of the supernova ejecta with pre-existing circumstellar material suggests the presence of a $\sim1.7 10^{15}$ cm gap or trough between the progenitor system and the surrounding circumstellar material. This gap could be due to significantly lower mass-loss $\sim15 (v_w/10 km/s)^{-1}$ years prior to explosion or evacuation of the circumstellar material by a low-density fast wind. The latter is consistent with observed properties of proto-planetary nebulae and with models of white-dwarf + asymptotic giant branch star progenitor systems with the asymptotic giant branch star in the proto-planetary nebula phase.
We analyze the data of the Gamma-Ray Burst/Supernova GRB030329/SN2003dh system obtained by HETE-2 (GCN [1]), R-XTE (GCN [2]), XMM (Tiengo et al. [3]) and VLT (Hjorth et al. [4]) within our theory (Ruffini et al. [5] and references therein) for GRB030329. By fitting the only three free parameters of the EMBH theory, we obtain the luminosity in fixed energy bands for the prompt emission and the afterglow (see Fig.1). Since the Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB) analysis is consistent with a spherically symmetric expansion, the energy of GRB030329 is E = 2.1 * 10^{52} erg, namely ~ 2 * 10^3 times larger than the Supernova energy. We conclude that either the GRB is triggering an induced-supernova event or both the GRB and the Supernova are triggered by the same relativistic process. In no way the GRB can be originated from the supernova. We also evidence that the XMM observations (Tiengo et al. [3]), much like in the system GRB980425/SN1998bw (Ruffini et al. [6], Pian et al. [7]), are not part of the GRB afterglow, as interpreted in the literature (Tiengo et al. [3]), but are associated to the Supernova phenomenon. A dedicated campaign of observations is needed to confirm the nature of this XMM source as a newly born neutron star cooling by generalized URCA processes.
Distant supernovae have been observed to be fainter than what is expected in a matter dominated universe. The most likely explanation is that the universe is dominated by an energy component with negative pressure -- dark energy. However, there are several astrophysical processes that could, in principle, affect the measurements and in order to be able to take advantage of the growing supernova statistics, the control of systematic effects is crucial. We discuss two of these; extinction due to intergalactic grey dust and dimming due to photon-axion oscillations and show how their effect on supernova observations can be constrained using observed quasar colours and spectra. For a wide range of intergalactic dust models, we are able to rule out any dimming larger than 0.2 magnitudes for a type Ia supernova at z=1. The corresponding limit for intergalactic Milky Way type dust is 0.03 mag. For the more speculative model of photons mixing with axions, we find that the effect is independent of photon energy for certain combinations of parameter values and a dimming as large as 0.6 magnitudes cannot be ruled out. These effects can have profound implications for the possibility of constraining dark energy properties using supernova observations.
X-ray Flashes (XRFs) are, like Gamma-Ray Bursts (GRBs), thought to signal the collapse of massive stars in distant galaxies. Many models posit that the isotropic equivalent energies of XRFs are lower than those for GRBs, such that they are visible from a reduced range of distances when compared with GRBs. Here we present the results of two epoch Hubble Space Telescope imaging of two XRFs. These images taken approximately 45 and 200 days post burst reveal no evidence for an associated supernova in either case. Supernovae such as SN 1998bw would have been visible out to z ~1.5 in each case, while fainter supernovae such as SN 2002ap would have been visible to z ~ 1. If the XRFs lie at such large distances, their energies would not fit the observed correlation between the GRB peak energy and isotropic energy release, in which soft bursts are less energetic. We conclude that, should these XRFs reside at low redshifts ($z<0.6$), either their line of sight is heavily extinguished, or they are associated with extremely faint supernovae, or, unlike GRBs, these XRFs do not have temporally coincident supernovae.
In the late 1960s the discovery of the Crab pulsar in its associated supernova remnant, launched a new field in supernova remnant research: the study of pulsar-driven or plerionic supernova remnants. In these type of remnants, the relativistic wind emitted by the pulsar, blows a pulsar wind nebula into the interior of its supernova remnant. Now, more then forty years after the discovery of the Crab pulsar, there are more then fifty plerionic supernova remnants known, due to the ever-increasing capacity of observational facilities. I will review our current understanding of the different evolutionary stages of a pulsar wind nebula as it is interacting with its associated supernova remnant.Therefore I will discuss both analytical and more recent numerical (M)HD models.The four main stages of a pulsar wind nebula are: the supersonic expansion stage, the reverse shock interaction stage, the subsonic expansion stage and ultimatelythe stage when the head of the bubble is bounded by a bow shock, due to the supersonic motion of the pulsar. Ultimately this pulsar wind nebula bow shock will break through its associated remnant, after which the pulsar-powered bow shock will interact directly with the interstellar medium. I will discuss recent numerical models from these type of pulsar wind nebulae and their morphology.
A stochastic model of the chemical enrichment of metal-poor systems by core-collapse (Type II) supernovae is presented, allowing for large-scale mixing of the enriched material by turbulent motions and cloud collisions in the interstellar medium. Infall of pristine material is taken into account by following the evolution of the gas density in the medium. Analytical expressions were derived for the number of stars enriched by a given number of supernovae, as well as for the amount of mass with which the ejected material from a supernova is mixed before being locked up in a subsequently formed star. It is shown that for reasonable values of the gas density (~0.1 cm-3) and of the supernova rate (~0.25 kpc-3 Myr-1) of the Galactic halo, the resulting metallicity distributions of the extreme Population II stars show a distinct cut-off at [Fe/H] ~= -4. In fact, by assuming no low-mass Population III stars were able to form out of the primordial interstellar medium, the derived fraction of stars below [Fe/H] = -4 is in agreement with observations. Moreover, the probability is high that even the most metal-poor stars observed to date have been enriched by several contributing supernovae. This partly explains the relatively small star-to-star scatter in many chemical-abundance ratios for stars down to [Fe/H] = -4, as recently found in several observational studies. Contribution from the thermonuclear (Type Ia) supernovae is found to be negligible over almost the entire extremely metal-poor regime. (***abridged***)
A stochastic model of the chemical enrichment of metal-poor systems by core-collapse supernovae is used to study the scatter in stellar abundance ratios. The resulting scatter in abundance ratios, e.g. as functions of the overall metallicity, is demonstrated to be crucially dependent on the as yet uncertain supernovae yields. The observed abundance ratios and their scatters therefore have diagnostic power as regards the yields. The relatively small star-to-star scatter observed in many chemical abundance ratios, e.g. by Cayrel et al. (2004) for stars down to [Fe/H] = -4, is tentatively explained by the averaging of a large number of contributing supernovae and by the cosmic selection effects favoring contributions from supernovae in a certain mass range for the most metal-poor stars. The scatter in observed abundances of alpha-elements is understood in terms of observational errors only, while additional spread in yields or sites of nucleosynthesis may affect the odd-even elements Na and Al. For the iron-group elements we find systematically too high predicted Cr/Fe and Cr/Mg ratios, as well as differences between the different sets of yields, both in terms of predicted abundance ratios and scatter. The semi-empirical yields recently suggested by Francois et al. (2004) are found to lead to scatter in abundance ratios significantly greater than observed, when applied in the inhomogeneous models. "Spurs", very narrow sequences in abundance-ratio diagrams, may disclose a single-supernova origin of the elements of the stars on the sequence. Verification of the existence of such features, called single supernova sequences (SSSs), is challenging. This will require samples of several hundred stars with abundance ratios observed to accuracies of 0.05 dex or better.
Core-collapse supernovae are among the most energetic explosions in the universe marking the catastrophic end of massive stars. In spite of rigorous studies for several decades, we still don't understand the explosion mechanism completely. Since they are related to many astrophysical phenomena such as nucleosynthesis, gamma-ray bursts and acceleration of cosmic rays, understanding of their physics has been of wide interest to the astrophysical community.   In this article, we review recent progress in the study of core-collapse supernovae focusing on the explosion mechanism, supernova neutrinos, and the gravitational waves. As for the explosion mechanism, we present a review paying particular attention to the roles of multidimensional aspects, such as convection, rotation, and magnetic fields, on the neutrino heating mechanism. Next, we discuss supernova neutrinos, which is a powerful tool to probe not only deep inside of the supernovae but also intrinsic properties of neutrinos. For this purpose, it is necessary to understand neutrino oscillation which has been established recently by a lot of experiments. Gravitational astronomy is now also becoming reality.   We present an extensive review on the physical foundations and the emission mechanism of gravitational waves in detail, and discuss the possibility of their detections.
There is now good evidence linking short-hard GRBs with both elliptical and spiral galaxies at relatively low redshifts, redshift of about 0.2. This contrasts with the average redshift of about 2 of long-duration events, which also occur only in star-forming galaxies. The diversity of hosts is reminiscent of type Ia supernovae, which are widely (but not universally) believed to originate from the coalescence of white dwarfs. By analogy, it has been postulated that short-hard bursts originate from neutron star mergers. Mergers, as well as stellar core-collapse events (type II SNe and long-duration GRBs) are accompanied by long-lived sub-relativistic components powered by radioactive decay of unstable elements produced in the explosion. It is therefore interesting to explore whether short duration events also have ejecta powered by radioactivity (i.e. that are supernova-like). Observations already inform us that any supernova like component in the first few well studied short hard bursts must be fainter than those typical of type Ia or core-collapse supernovae. Rather than refer to weaker supernova-like component as ``mini-super nova'', an etymologically indefensible term, I use the term {\it macronova}. I investigate the observability of macronovae powered by neutron decay and by radioactive Nickel. Separately, I note that a macronova will reprocess energetic emission arising from a long lived central source. I find that surprisingly interesting limits on the basic parameters of macronovae can be obtained provided observations are obtained with current 10-m class telescopes over a range of one hour to one day following the burst.
We study the sensitivity to neutrino masses of a Galactic supernova neutrino signal as could be measured with the detectors presently in operation and with future large volume water \v{C}erencov and scintillator detectors. The analysis uses the full statistics of neutrino events. The method proposed uses the principles of Bayesian inference reasoning and has shown a remarkably independence of astrophysical assumptions. We show that, after accounting for the uncertainties in the detailed astrophysical description of the neutrino signal and taking into account the effects of neutrino oscillations in the supernova mantle, detectors presently in operation can have enough sensitivity to reveal a neutrino mass (or to set upper limits) at the level of 1 eV. This is sensibly better than present results from tritium $\beta$-decay experiments, competitive with the most conservative limits from neutrinoless double $\beta$-decay and less precise but remarkably less dependent from prior assumptions than cosmological measurements. Future megaton water \v{C}erencov detectors and large volume scintillator detectors will allow for about a factor of two improvement in the sensitivity; however, they will not be competitive with the next generation of tritium $\beta$-decay and neutrinoless double $\beta$-decay experiments. Using the codes developed to perform the generation of synthetic supernova signals and their analysis we created a computer package, SUNG (SUpernova Neutrino Generation tool, http://urania.udea.edu.co/sungweb), aimed to offer a general purpose solution to perform calculations in supernova neutrino studies.
We propose a new parametrization of the deceleration parameter to study its time-variation behavior. The advantage of parameterizing the deceleration parameter is that we do not need to assume any underlying theory of gravity. By fitting the model to the 157 gold sample supernova Ia data, we find strong evidence that the Universe is currently accelerating and it accelerated in the past. By fitting the model to the 115 nearby and Supernova Legacy Survey supernova Ia data, the evidence that the Universe is currently accelerating is weak, although there is still a strong evidence that the Universe once accelerated in the past. The results obtained from the 157 gold sample supernova Ia data and those from the 115 supernova Ia data are not directly comparable because the two different data sets measure the luminosity distance up to different redshifts.   We then use the Friedmann equation and a dark energy parametrization to discuss the same problem. When we fit the model to the supernova Ia data alone, we find weak evidence that the Universe is accelerating and the current matter density is higher than that measured from other experiments. After we add the Sloan Digital Sky Survey data to constrain the dark energy model, we find that the behavior of the deceleration parameter is almost the same as that obtained from parameterizing the deceleration parameter.
Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are short, intense flashes of soft gamma-rays coming from the distant Universe. Long-duration GRBs (those lasting more than ~2 s) are believed to originate from the deaths of massive stars, mainly on the basis of a handful of solid associations between GRBs and supernovae. GRB 060614, one of the closest GRBs discovered, consisted of a 5-s hard spike followed by softer, brighter emission that lasted for ~100 s. Here we report deep optical observations of GRB 060614 showing no emerging supernova with absolute visual magnitude brighter than M_V = -13.7. Any supernova associated with GRB 060614 was therefore at least 100 times fainter, at optical wavelengths, than the other supernovae associated with GRBs. This demonstrates that some long-lasting GRBs can either be associated with a very faint supernova or produced by different phenomena.
We present an empirical model of Type Ia supernovae spectro-photometric evolution with time. The model is built using a large data set including light-curves and spectra of both nearby and distant supernovae, the latter being observed by the SNLS collaboration. We derive the average spectral sequence of Type Ia supernovae and their main variability components including a color variation law. The model allows us to measure distance moduli in the spectral range 2500-8000 A with calculable uncertainties, including those arising from variability of spectral features. Thanks to the use of high-redshift SNe to model the rest-frame UV spectral energy distribution, we are able to derive improved distance estimates for SNe Ia in the redshift range 0.8<z<1.1. The model can also be used to improve spectroscopic identification algorithms, and derive photometric redshifts of distant Type Ia supernovae.
Future use of type Ia supernovae for cosmology aims not only to determine the equation of state of dark energy, but also to constrain possible variations in its value. To achieve this goal, supernovae need to become better calibrated standard candles - not only to improve the precision of the measurement, but more importantly to gain better control over systematic uncertainties in order to ensure the accuracy of the result.   Here we report on a project to quantify the diversity in type Ia supernovae, and to look for trends and/or sub-types that can be used to improve their calibration as standard candles. We implement a version of principal component analysis on type Ia supernova spectra. Although the quantity of data is not sufficient to draw any firm conclusions we show that this method holds promise for, at the very least, effectively separating peculiar supernovae. Whether it can be further used to improve the calibration of normal type Ia's remains a project for future study.
We investigate the sensitivity of some of the proposed next-generation neutrino experiments to a galactic supernova. In particular, we study how well the supernova parameters (the average energies and luminosities) can be separated from the unknown neutrino oscillation parameters ($\theta_{13}$ and the neutrino mass hierarchy). Three types of experiments, all in the 100-kton class, are compared. These are: a 540 kton water-Cherenkov detector, a 100 kton liquid Argon detector and a 50 kton scintillator detector. We demonstrate that practically all of these proposed detectors have the possibility to determine the hierarchy of the neutrino masses if the angle $\theta_{13}$ is sufficiently large ($\sin^2(\theta_{13}) > 10^{-4}$) and the hierarchy of the average energies is larger than about 20%. They can at the same time determine some of the supernova parameters well. The average energy of the $\nu_\mu$ and $\nu_\tau$ species can be determined within 5% uncertainty in most of the parameter space suggested by supernova simulations. The detection of several separable channels measuring different combinations of charged current and neutral current processes is crucial for determining the value of $\theta_{13}$ and the hierarchy. However, there are cases where a few of the SN parameters can be determined rather well even if only the main charged current detection channel is available.
The recent HESS detections of supernova remnant shells in TeV gamma-rays confirm the theoretical predictions that supernova remnants can operate as powerful cosmic ray accelerators. If these objects are responsible for the bulk of galactic cosmic rays, then they should accelerate protons and nuclei to 10^15 eV and beyond, i.e. act as cosmic PeVatrons. The model of diffusive shock acceleration allows, under certain conditions, acceleration of particles to such high energies and their gradual injection into the interstellar medium, mainly during the Sedov phase of the remnant evolution. The most energetic particles are released first, while particles of lower energies are more effectively confined in the shell, and are released at later epochs. Thus the spectrum of nonthermal paticles inside the shell extends to PeV energies only during a relatively short period of the evolution of the remnant. For this reason one may expect spectra of secondary gamma-rays and neutrinos extending to energies beyond 10 TeV only from T \lesssim 1000 yr old supernova remnants. On the other hand, if by a chance a massive gas cloud appears in the \lesssim 100 pc vicinity of the supernova remnant, ``delayed'' multi-TeV signals of gamma-rays and neutrinos arise when the most energetic partices emerged from the supernova shell reach the cloud. The detection of such delayed emission of multi-TeV gamma-rays and neutrinos allows indirect identification of the supernova remnant as a particle PeVatron.
Recently Supernova 2006gy was noted as the most luminous ever recorded, with a total radiated energy of ~10^44 Joules. It was proposed that the progenitor may have been a massive evolved star similar to eta Carinae, which resides in our own galaxy at a distance of about 2.3 kpc. eta Carinae appears ready to detonate. Although it is too distant to pose a serious threat as a normal supernova, and given its rotation axis is unlikely to produce a Gamma-Ray Burst oriented toward the Earth, eta Carinae is about 30,000 times nearer than 2006gy, and we re-evaluate it as a potential superluminous supernova. We find that given the large ratio of emission in the optical to the X-ray, atmospheric effects are negligible. Ionization of the atmosphere and concomitant ozone depletion are unlikely to be important. Any cosmic ray effects should be spread out over ~10^4 y, and similarly unlikely to produce any serious perturbation to the biosphere. We also discuss a new possible effect of supernovae, endocrine disruption induced by blue light near the peak of the optical spectrum. This is a possibility for nearby supernovae at distances too large to be considered "dangerous" for other reasons. However, due to reddening and extinction by the interstellar medium, eta Carinae is unlikely to trigger such effects to any significant degree.
We use the VESPA algorithm and spectra from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey to investigate the star formation history of the host galaxies of 257 Type Ia supernovae. We find 5$\sigma$ evidence for a short-lived population of progenitors with lifetimes of less than 180 Myr, indicating a Type Ia supernova channel arising from stars in the mass range $\sim$3.5-8 $M_\odot$. As standardizeable candles, Type Ia supernovae play an important role in determining the expansion history of the Universe, but to be useful for future cosmological surveys, the peak luminosity needs to be free of uncorrected systematic effects at the level of 1-2%. If the different progenitor routes lead to supernovae with even moderately small differences in properties, then these need to be corrected for separately, or they could lead to a systematic bias in future supernovae surveys, as the prompt route is likely to increase in importance at high redshift. VESPA analysis of hosts could be a valuable tool in this, by identifying which progenitor route is most likely.
The distance and redshift of a type Ia supernova can be determined simultaneously through its multi-band light curves. This fact may be used for imaging surveys that discover and obtain photometry for large numbers of supernovae; so many that it would be difficult to obtain a spectroscopic redshift for each. Using available supernova-analysis tools we find that there are several conditions in which a viable distance-redshift can be determined. Uncertainties in the effective distance at z~0.3 are dominated by redshift uncertainties coupled with the steepness of the Hubble law. By z~0.5 the Hubble law flattens out and distance-modulus uncertainties dominate. Observations that give S/N=50 at peak brightness and a four-day observer cadence in each of griz-bands are necessary to match the intrinsic supernova magnitude dispersion out to z=1.0. Lower S/N can be tolerated with the addition of redshift priors (e.g. from a host-galaxy photometric redshift), observations in an additional redder band, or by focusing on supernova redshifts that have particular leverage for this measurement. More stringent S/N requirements are anticipated as improved systematics control over intrinsic color, metallicity, and dust is attempted to be drawn from light curves.
The first stars form in dark matter halos of masses ~10^6 M_sun as suggested by an increasing number of numerical simulations. Radiation feedback from these stars expels most of the gas from their shallow potential well of their surrounding dark matter halos. We use cosmological adaptive mesh refinement simulations that include self-consistent Population III star formation and feedback to examine the properties of assembling early dwarf galaxies. Accurate radiative transport is modeled with adaptive ray tracing. We include supernova explosions and follow the metal enrichment of the intergalactic medium. The calculations focus on the formation of several dwarf galaxies and their progenitors. In these halos, baryon fractions in 10^8 solar mass halos decrease by a factor of 2 with stellar feedback and by a factor of 3 with supernova explosions. We find that radiation feedback and supernova explosions increase gaseous spin parameters up to a factor of 4 and vary with time. Stellar feedback, supernova explosions, and H_2 cooling create a complex, multi-phase interstellar medium whose densities and temperatures can span up to 6 orders of magnitude at a given radius. The pair-instability supernovae of Population III stars alone enrich the halos with virial temperatures of 10^4 K to approximately 10^{-3} of solar metallicity. We find that 40% of the heavy elements resides in the intergalactic medium (IGM) at the end of our calculations. The highest metallicity gas exists in supernova remnants and very dilute regions of the IGM.
SN 2006gy radiated far more energy in visual light than any other supernova so far, and potential explanations for its energy demands have implications for galactic chemical evolution and the deaths of the first stars. It remained bright for over 200 days, longer than any normal supernova, and it radiated more than 1e51 ergs of luminous energy at visual wavelengths. I argue that this Type IIn supernova was probably the explosion of an extremely massive star like Eta Carinae that retained its hydrogen envelope when it exploded, having suffered relatively little mass loss during its lifetime. That this occurred at roughly Solar metallicity challenges current paradigms for mass loss in massive-star evolution. I explore a few potential explanations for SN2006gy's power source, involving either circumstellar interaction, or instead, the decay of 56Ni. If SN 2006gy was powered by the conversion of shock energy into light, then the conditions must be truly extraordinary and traditional interaction models don't work. If SN 2006gy was powered by radioactive decay, then the uncomfortably huge 56Ni mass requires that the star exploded as a pair instability supernova. The mere possibility of this makes SN 2006gy interesting, especially at this meeting, because it is the first good candidate for a genuine pair instability supernova.
$UBVRI$ photometry and medium resolution optical spectroscopy of peculiar Type Ia supernova SN 2005hk are presented and analysed, covering the pre-maximum phase to around 400 days after explosion. The supernova is found to be underluminous compared to "normal" Type Ia supernovae. The photometric and spectroscopic evolution of SN 2005hk is remarkably similar to the peculiar Type Ia event SN 2002cx. The expansion velocity of the supernova ejecta is found to be lower than normal Type Ia events. The spectra obtained $\gsim 200$ days since explosion do not show the presence of forbidden [\ion{Fe}{ii}], [\ion{Fe}{iii}] and [\ion{Co}{iii}] lines, but are dominated by narrow, permitted \ion{Fe}{ii}, NIR \ion{Ca}{ii} and \ion{Na}{i} lines with P-Cygni profiles. Thermonuclear explosion model with Chandrasekhar mass ejecta and a kinetic energy smaller ($\KE = 0.3 \times 10^{51} {\rm ergs}$) than that of canonical Type Ia supernovae is found to well explain the observed bolometric light curve. The mass of \Nifs synthesized in this explosion is $0.18 \Msun$. The early spectra are successfully modeled with this less energetic model with some modifications of the abundance distribution. The late spectrum is explained as a combination of a photospheric component and a nebular component.
We present multi-band light curves and distances for five type Ia supernovae at intermediate redshifts, 0.18<z<0.27. Three telescopes on the Canary Island of La Palma, INT, NOT and JKT, were used for discovery and follow-up of type Ia supernovae in the g' and r' filters. Supernova fluxes were measured by simultaneously fitting a supernova and host galaxy model to the data, and then calibrated using star catalogues from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey. The light curve peak luminosities, corrected for light curve shape and colour, are consistent with the expectations for a flat LambdaCDM universe at the 1.5-sigma level. One supernova in the sample, SN1999dr, shows surprisingly large reddening, considering that it is both located at a significant distance from the core of its host (~4 times the fitted exponential radius) and that the galaxy can be spectroscopically classified as early-type with no signs of ongoing star formation.
We discuss the flavor conversion of neutrinos from core collapse supernovae that have oxygen-neon-magnesium (ONeMg) cores. Using the numerically calculated evolution of the star up to 650 ms post bounce, we find that, for the normal mass hierarchy, the electron neutrino flux in a detector shows signatures of two typical features of an ONeMg-core supernova: a sharp step in the density profile at the base of the He shell and a faster shock wave propagation compared to iron core supernovae. Before the shock hits the density step (t ~ 150 ms), the survival probability of electron neutrinos is about 0.68, in contrast to values of 0.32 or less for an iron core supernova. The passage of the shock through the step and its subsequent propagation cause a decrease of the survival probability and a decrease of the amplitude of oscillations in the Earth, reflecting the transition to a more adiabatic propagation inside the star. These changes affect the lower energy neutrinos first; they are faster and more sizable for larger theta_13. They are unique of ONeMg-core supernovae, and give the possibility to test the speed of the shock wave. The time modulation of the Earth effect and its negative sign at the neutronization peak are the most robust signatures in a detector.
The fitting of the observed redshifts and magnitudes of type Ia supernovae to what we would see in homogeneous cosmological models has led to constraints on cosmological parameters. However, in doing such fits it is assumed that the sampled supernovae are moving with the Hubble flow, i.e. that their peculiar velocities are zero. In reality, peculiar velocities will modify supernova data in a way that can impact best-fit cosmological parameters. We theoretically quantify this effect in the nonlinear regime with a Monte-Carlo analysis, using data from semi-analytic galaxy catalogs that are built from the Millennium N-body simulation. We find scaling relations for the errors in best-fit parameters resulting solely from peculiar velocities, as a function of the total number of sources in a supernova survey N and its maximum redshift z_max. For low redshift surveys, we find that these errors can be of the same order of magnitude as the errors due to an intrinsic magnitude scatter of 0.1 mag. For a survey with N=2000 and z_max=1.7, we estimate that the expected peculiar velocity-induced errors in the best-fit cosmological constant density and equation of state can be sigma_Lambda~0.009 and sigma_w~0.01, respectively, which are subdominant to the errors due to the intrinsic scatter. We further find that throwing away supernova data below a redshift z~0.01-0.02 can reduce the combined error, due to peculiar velocities and the intrinsic scatter, but by only about 10%.
We report the successful identification of the type of the supernova responsible for the supernova remnant SNR 0509-675 in the Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) using Gemini spectra of surrounding light echoes. The ability to classify outbursts associated with centuries-old remnants provides a new window into several aspects of supernova research and is likely to be successful in providing new constraints on additional LMC supernovae as well as their historical counterparts in the Milky Way Galaxy (MWG). The combined spectrum of echo light from SNR 0509-675 shows broad emission and absorption lines consistent with a supernova (SN) spectrum. We create a spectral library consisting of 26 SNe Ia and 6 SN Ib/c that are time-integrated, dust-scattered by LMC dust, and reddened by the LMC and MWG. We fit these SN templates to the observed light echo spectrum using $\chi^2$ minimization as well as correlation techniques, and we find that overluminous 91T-like SNe Ia with $\dm15<0.9$ match the observed spectrum best.
Type Ia supernovae are exploding stars that are used to measure the accelerated expansion of the Universe and are responsible for most of the iron ever produced. Although there is general agreement that the exploding star is a white dwarf in a binary system, the exact configuration and trigger of the explosion is unclear, which could hamper their use for precision cosmology. Two families of progenitor models have been proposed. In the first, a white dwarf accretes material from a companion until it exceeds the Chandrasekhar mass, collapses and explodes. Alternatively, two white dwarfs merge, again causing catastrophic collapse and an explosion. It has hitherto been impossible to determine if either model is correct. Here we report the discovery of an object in pre-supernova archival X-ray images at the position of the recent type Ia supernova (2007on) in the elliptical galaxy NGC 1404. Deep optical images (also archival) show no sign of this object. From this we conclude that the X-ray source is the progenitor of the supernova, which favours the accretion model for this supernova, although the host galaxy is older (6-9 Gyr) than the age at which the explosions are predicted in the accreting models.
Massive stars undergo a violent death when the supply of nuclear fuel in their cores is exhausted, resulting in a catastrophic "core-collapse" supernova. Such events are usually only detected at least a few days after the star has exploded. Observations of the supernova SNLS-04D2dc with the Galaxy Evolution Explorer space telescope reveal a radiative precursor from the supernova shock before the shock reached the surface of the star and show the initial expansion of the star at the beginning of the explosion. Theoretical models of the ultraviolet light curve confirm that the progenitor was a red supergiant, as expected for this type of supernova. These observations provide a way to probe the physics of core-collapse supernovae and the internal structures of their progenitor stars
We present $UBVRI$ CCD photometry and optical spectra of the type Ia supernova SN 2003hx which appeared in the galaxy NGC 2076, obtained till $\sim$ 146 days after the epoch of $B$ band maximum. The supernova reached at maximum brightness in $B$ band on JD 245 2893 $\pm$ 1.0 with an apparent magnitude of 14.92 $\pm$ 0.01 mag which was estimated by making template fits to the light curves. SN 2003hx is an example of a highly reddened supernova with $E(B-V)$ = 0.56 $\pm$ 0.23. We estimate $R_v$ = 1.97 $\pm$ 0.54 which indicates the small size of dust particles as compared to their galactic counterparts. The luminosity decline rate is $\Delta m_{15}(B)$ = 1.17 $\pm$ 0.12 mag and the absolute $B$ band magnitude obtained from the luminosity versus decline rate relation (Phillips et al. 1999) is $M^B_{max}$ = -19.20 $\pm$ 0.18 mag. The peak bolometric luminosity indicates that $\sim$ 0.66 $M_\odot$ mass of $^{56}$ Ni was ejected by the supernova. The spectral evolution indicates the supernova to be a normal type Ia event.
The legacy of solar neutrinos suggests that large neutrino detectors should be sited underground. However, to instead go underwater bypasses the need to move mountains, allowing much larger water Cherenkov detectors. We show that reaching a detector mass scale of ~5 Megatons, the size of the proposed Deep-TITAND, would permit observations of neutrino "mini-bursts" from supernovae in nearby galaxies on a roughly yearly basis, and we develop the immediate qualitative and quantitative consequences. Importantly, these mini-bursts would be detected over backgrounds without the need for optical evidence of the supernova, guaranteeing the beginning of time-domain MeV neutrino astronomy. The ability to identify, to the second, every core collapse in the local Universe would allow a continuous "death watch" of all stars within ~5 Mpc, making practical many previously-impossible tasks in probing rare outcomes and refining coordination of multi-wavelength/multi-particle observations and analysis. These include the abilities to promptly detect otherwise-invisible prompt black hole formation, provide advance warning for supernova shock-breakout searches, define tight time windows for gravitational-wave searches, and identify "supernova impostors" by the non-detection of neutrinos. Observations of many supernovae, even with low numbers of detected neutrinos, will help answer questions about supernovae that cannot be resolved with a single high-statistics event in the Milky Way.
We explore the observational characteristics of jet-driven supernovae by simulating bipolar-jet-driven explosions in a red supergiant progenitor. We present results of four models in which we hold the injected kinetic energy at a constant $10^{51}$ ergs across all jet models but vary the specific characteristics of the jets to explore the influence of the nature of jets on the structure of the supernova ejecta. We evolve the explosions past shock-breakout and into quasi-homologous expansion of the supernova envelope into a red supergiant wind. The oppositely-directed, nickel-rich jets give a large-scale asymmetry that may account for the non-spherical excitation and substructure of spectral lines such as H$\alpha$ and He I 10830\AA. Jets with a large fraction of kinetic to thermal energy punch through the progenitor envelope and give rise to explosions that would be observed to be asymmetric from the earliest epochs, inconsistent with spectropolarimetric measurements of Type II supernovae. Jets with higher thermal energy fractions result in explosions that are roughly spherical at large radii but are significantly elongated at smaller radii, deep inside the ejecta, in agreement with the polarimetric observations. We present shock breakout light curves that indicate that strongly aspherical shock breakouts are incompatible with recent {\it GALEX} observations of shock breakout from red supergiant stars. Comparison with observations indicates that jets must deposit their kinetic energy efficiently throughout the ejecta while in the hydrogen envelope. Thermal energy-dominated jets satisfy this criterion and yield many of the observational characteristics of Type II supernovae.
Analysis of type 1a supernovae observations out to a redshift of $z$=1.6 shows that there is good agreement between the light-curve widths and $(1+z)$ which is usually interpreted as a strong support for time dilation due to an expanding universe. This paper argues that a strong case can be made for a static universe where the supernovae light-curve-width dependence on redshift is due to selection effects. The analysis is based on the principle that it is the total energy (the fluence) and not the peak magnitude that is the best `standard candle' for type 1a supernovae. A simple model using a static cosmology provides an excellent prediction for the dependence of light curve width on redshift and the luminosity-width relationship for nearby supernovae. The width dependence arises from the assumption of constant absolute magnitude resulting in strong selection of lower luminosity supernovae at higher redshifts due to the use of an incorrect distance modulus. Using a static cosmology, curvature-cosmology, and without fitting any parameters the analysis shows that the total energy is independent of redshift and provides a Hubble constant of $63.1\pm2.5$ kms$^{-1}$ Mpc$^{-1}$. There is no indication of any deviation at large redshifts that has been ascribed to the occurrence of dark energy.
Knowledge of the progenitors of core-collapse supernovae is a fundamental component in understanding the explosions. The recent progress in finding such stars is reviewed. The minimum initial mass that can produce a supernova has converged to 8 +/- 1 solar masses, from direct detections of red supergiant progenitors of II-P SNe and the most massive white dwarf progenitors, although this value is model dependent. It appears that most type Ibc supernovae arise from moderate mass interacting binaries. The highly energetic, broad-lined Ic supernovae are likely produced by massive, Wolf-Rayet progenitors. There is some evidence to suggest that the majority of massive stars above ~20 solar masses may collapse quietly to black-holes and that the explosions remain undetected. The recent discovery of a class of ultra-bright type II supernovae and the direct detection of some progenitor stars bearing luminous blue variable characteristics suggests some very massive stars do produce highly energetic explosions. The physical mechanism is open to debate and these SNe pose a challenge to stellar evolutionary theory.
The progenitors of Type Ia and some core collapse supernovae are thought to be stars in binary systems, but little observational evidence exists to confirm the hypothesis. We suggest that the collision of the supernova ejecta with its companion star should produce detectable emission in the hours and days following the explosion. The interaction occurs at distances ~10^11-10^13 cm and shocks the impacting supernova debris, dissipating kinetic energy and re-heating the gas. Initially, some radiation may escape promptly through the evacuated region of the shadowcone, producing a bright X-ray (0.1-2 keV) burst lasting minutes to hours with luminosity L ~ 10^44 ergs/s. Continuing radiative diffusion from deeper layers of shock heated ejecta produces a longer lasting optical/UV emission which exceeds the radioactively powered luminosity of the supernova for the first few days after the explosion. These signatures are prominent for viewing angles looking down upon the shocked region, or about 10% of the time. The properties of the emission provide a straightforward measure of the separation distance between the stars and hence (assuming Roche lobe overflow) the companion's radius. Current optical and UV data sets likely already constrain red giant companions. By systematically acquiring early time data for many supernovae, it should eventually be possible to empirically determine how the parameters of the progenitor system influence the outcome of the explosion.
In this paper we generalize the flux ratio method Bailey et al. (2009) to the case of two luminosity indicators and search the optimal luminosity-flux ratio relations on a set of spectra whose phases are around not only the date of bright light but also other time. With these relations, a new method is proposed to constrain the host galaxy extinction of SN Ia and its distance. It is first applied to the low redshift supernovas and then to the high redshift ones. The results of the low redshift supernovas indicate that the flux ratio method can indeed give well constraint on the host galaxy extinction parameter E(B-V), but weaker constraints on R_{V}. The high redshift supernova spectra are processed by the same method as the low redshift ones besides some differences due to their high redshift. Among 16 high redshift supernovas, 15 are fitted very well except 03D1gt. Based on these distances, Hubble diagram is drew and the contents of the Universe are analyzed. It supports an acceleration behavior in the late Universe. Therefore, the flux ratio method can give constraints on the host galaxy extinction and supernova distance independently. We believe, through further studies, it may provide a precise tool to probe the acceleration of the Universe than before.
We show that energy deposited into an expanding supernova remnant by a highly magnetic (B ~ 5 x 10^14 G) neutron star spinning at an initial period of P ~ 2-20 ms can substantially brighten the light curve. For magnetars with parameters in this range, the rotational energy is released on a timescale of days to weeks, which is comparable to the effective diffusion time through the supernova remnant. The late time energy injection can then be radiated without suffering overwhelming adiabatic expansion losses. The magnetar input also produces a central bubble which sweeps ejecta into an internal dense shell, resulting in a prolonged period of nearly constant photospheric velocity in the observed spectra. We derive analytic expressions for the light curve rise time and peak luminosity as a function of B, P and the properties of the supernova ejecta that allow for direct inferences about the underlying magnetar in bright supernovae. We perform numerical radiation hydrodynamical calculations of a few specific instances and compare the resulting light curves to observed events. Magnetar activity is likely to impact more than a few percent of all core collapse supernovae, and may naturally explain some of the brightest events ever seen (e.g., SN 2005ap and SN 2008es) at L > 10^44 ergs/s.
We present a method using the SALT2 light curve fitter to determine the redshift of Type Ia supernovae in the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS) based on their photometry in g', r', i' and z'. On 289 supernovae of the first three years of SNLS data, we obtain a precision $\sigma_{\Delta z/(1+z)} = 0.022$ on average up to a redshift of 1.0, with a higher precision of 0.016 for z<0.45 and a lower one of 0.025 for z>0.45. The rate of events with $|\Delta z|/(1+z)>0.15$ (catastrophic errors) is 1.4%. Both the precision and the rate of catastrophic errors are better than what can be currently obtained using host galaxy photometric redshifts. Photometric redshifts of this precision may be useful for future experiments which aim to discover up to millions of supernovae Ia but without spectroscopy for most of them.
We discuss the science motivations and prospects for a joint analysis of gravitational-wave (GW) and low-energy neutrino data to search for prompt signals from nearby supernovae (SNe). Both gravitational-wave and low-energy neutrinos are expected to be produced in the innermost region of a core-collapse supernova, and a search for coincident signals would probe the processes which power a supernova explosion. It is estimated that the current generation of neutrino and gravitational-wave detectors would be sensitive to Galactic core-collapse supernovae, and would also be able to detect electromagnetically dark SNe. A joint GW-neutrino search would enable improvements to searches by way of lower detection thresholds, larger distance range, better live-time coverage by a network of GW and neutrino detectors, and increased significance of candidate detections. A close collaboration between the GW and neutrino communities for such a search will thus go far toward realizing a much sought-after astrophysics goal of detecting the next nearby supernova.
Using the Hubble Space Telescope ACS imaging of the GOODS North and South fields during Cycles 11, 12, and 13, we derive empirical constraints on the delay-time distribution function for type Ia supernovae. We extend our previous analysis to the three-year sample of 56 SNe Ia over the range 0.2<z<1.8, using a Markov chain Monte Carlo to determine the best-fit unimodal delay-time distribution function. The test, which ultimately compares the star formation rate density history to the unbinned volumetric SN Ia rate history from the GOODS/HST-SN survey, reveals a SN Ia delay-time distribution that is tightly confined to 3-4 Gyrs (to >95% confidence). This result is difficult to resolve with any intrinsic delay-time distribution function (bimodal or otherwise), in which a substantial fraction (e.g., >10%) of events are ``prompt'', requiring less than approximately 1 Gyr to develop from formation to explosion. The result is, however, strongly motivated by the decline in the number of SNe Ia at z>1.2. Sub-samples of the HST-SN data confined to lower redshifts (z<1) show plausible delay-time distributions that are dominated by prompt events, which is more consistent with results from low-redshift supernova samples and supernova host galaxy properties. Scenarios in which a substantial fraction of z>1.2 supernovae are extraordinarily obscured by dust may partly explain the differences in low-z and high-z results. Other possible resolutions may include environmental dependencies (such as gas-phase metallicity) that affect the progenitor mechanism efficiency, especially in the early universe.
There is wide agreement that Type Ia supernovae (used as standard candles for cosmology) are associated with the thermonuclear explosions of white dwarf stars. The nuclear runaway that leads to the explosion could start in a white dwarf gradually accumulating matter from a companion star until it reaches the Chandrasekhar limit, or could be triggered by the merger of two white dwarfs in a compact binary system. The X-ray signatures of these two possible paths are very different. Whereas no strong electromagnetic emission is expected in the merger scenario until shortly before the supernova, the white dwarf accreting material from the normal star becomes a source of copious X-rays for ~1e7 yr before the explosion. This offers a means of determining which path dominates. Here we report that the observed X-ray flux from six nearby elliptical galaxies and galaxy bulges is a factor of ~30-50 less than predicted in the accretion scenario, based upon an estimate of the supernova rate from their K-band luminosities. We conclude that no more than ~5 per cent of Type Ia supernovae in early type galaxies can be produced by white dwarfs in accreting binary systems, unless their progenitors are much younger than the bulk of the stellar population in these galaxies, or explosions of sub-Chandrasekhar white dwarfs make a significant contribution to the supernova rate.
The light echo systems of historical supernovae in the Milky Way and local group galaxies provide an unprecedented opportunity to reveal the effects of asymmetry on observables, particularly optical spectra. Scattering dust at different locations on the light echo ellipsoid witnesses the supernova from different perspectives and the light consequently scattered towards Earth preserves the shape of line profile variations introduced by asymmetries in the supernova photosphere. However, the interpretation of supernova light echo spectra to date has not involved a detailed consideration of the effects of outburst duration and geometrical scattering modifications due to finite scattering dust filament dimension, inclination, and image point-spread function and spectrograph slit width. In this paper, we explore the implications of these factors and present a framework for future resolved supernova light echo spectra interpretation, and test it against Cas A and SN 1987A light echo spectra. We conclude that the full modeling of the dimensions and orientation of the scattering dust using the observed light echoes at two or more epochs is critical for the correct interpretation of light echo spectra. Indeed, without doing so one might falsely conclude that differences exist when none are actually present.
Aims: We present neutrino light curves and energy spectra for two representative type Ia supernova explosion models: a pure deflagration and a delayed detonation. Methods: We calculate the neutrino flux from $\beta$ processes using nuclear statistical equilibrium abundances convoluted with approximate neutrino spectra of the individual nuclei and the thermal neutrino spectrum (pair+plasma). Results: Although the two considered thermonuclear supernova explosion scenarios are expected to produce almost identical electromagnetic output, their neutrino signatures appear vastly different, which allow an unambiguous identification of the explosion mechanism: a pure deflagration produces a single peak in the neutrino light curve, while the addition of the second maximum characterizes a delayed-detonation. We identified the following main contributors to the neutrino signal: (1) weak electron neutrino emission from electron captures (in particular on the protons Co55 and Ni56) and numerous beta-active nuclei produced by the thermonuclear flame and/or detonation front, (2) electron antineutrinos from positron captures on neutrons, and (3) the thermal emission from pair annihilation. We estimate that a pure deflagration supernova explosion at a distance of 1 kpc would trigger about 14 events in the future 50 kt liquid scintillator detector and some 19 events in a 0.5 Mt water Cherenkov-type detector. Conclusions: While in contrast to core-collapse supernovae neutrinos carry only a very small fraction of the energy produced in the thermonuclear supernova explosion, the SN Ia neutrino signal provides information that allows us to unambiguously distinguish between different possible explosion scenarios. These studies will become feasible with the next generation of proposed neutrino observatories.
Collective flavor oscillations are known to bring multiple splits in the supernova (SN) neutrino and antineutrino spectra. These spectral splits depend not only on the mass hierarchy of the neutrinos but also on the initial relative flux composition. Observation of spectral splits in a future galactic supernova signal is expected to throw light on the mass hierarchy pattern of the neutrinos. However, since the Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background (DSNB) comprises of a superposition of neutrino fluxes from all past supernovae, and since different supernovae are expected to have slightly different initial fluxes, it is pertinent to check if the hierarchy dependent signature of collective oscillations can survive this averaging of the flux spectra. Since the actual distribution of SN with initial relative flux spectra of the neutrinos and antineutrinos is unknown, we assume a log-normal distribution for them. We study the dependence of the hierarchy sensitivity to the mean and variance of the log-normal distribution function. We find that the hierarchy sensitivity depends crucially on the mean value of the relative initial luminosity. The effect of the width is to reduce the hierarchy sensitivity for all values of the mean initial relative luminosity. We find that in the very small mixing angle ($\theta_{13}$) limit considering only statistical errors even for very moderate values of variance, there is almost no detectable hierarchy sensitivity if the mean relative luminosities of $\nu_e$ and $\bar\nu_e$ are greater than 1.
Electrons and electron neutrinos in the inner core of the core-collapse supernova are highly degenerate and therefore numerous during a few seconds of explosion. In contrast, leptons of other flavors are non-degenerate and therefore relatively scarce. This is due to lepton flavor conservation. If this conservation law is broken by some non-standard interactions, electron neutrinos are converted to muon and tau-neutrinos, and electrons -- to muons. This affects the supernova dynamics and the supernova neutrino signal in several ways. In particular, the total neutrino luminosity in the first second of the collapse is increased due to the larger free path of the non-electron neutrinos. This effect may have important consequences as the increase of the neutrino luminosity is known to facilitate the explosion. We consider an extension of the Standard Model by scalar bileptons which mediate lepton flavor violation. It is shown that in case of TeV-mass bileptons the electron fermi gas is equilibrated with non-electron species inside the inner supernova core at a time-scale of order of (1-100) ms. In particular, a scalar triplet which generates neutrino masses through the see-saw type II mechanism is considered. Non-observation of rare decays and data on neutrino mixing and neutrino masses restrict possible lepton flavor violation effects in this case. However a region in the parameter space of the model exists which fits all the experimental constraints and provides lepton flavor violation sufficient for observable effects in supernova.
It is now clear that a subset of supernovae display evidence for jets and are observed as gamma-ray bursts. The angular momentum distribution of massive stellar endpoints provides a rare means of constraining the nature of the central engine in core-collapse explosions. Unlike supermassive black holes, the spin of stellar-mass black holes in X-ray binary systems is little affected by accretion, and accurately reflects the spin set at birth. A modest number of stellar-mass black hole angular momenta have now been measured using two independent X-ray spectroscopic techniques. In contrast, rotation-powered pulsars spin-down over time, via magnetic braking, but a modest number of natal spin periods have now been estimated. For both canonical and extreme neutron star parameters, statistical tests strongly suggest that the angular momentum distributions of black holes and neutron stars are markedly different. Within the context of prevalent models for core-collapse supernovae, the angular momentum distributions are consistent with black holes typically being produced in GRB-like supernovae with jets, and with neutron stars typically being produced in supernovae with too little angular momentum to produce jets via magnetohydrodynamic processes. It is possible that neutron stars are imbued with high spin initially, and rapidly spun-down shortly after the supernova event, but the available mechanisms may be inconsistent with some observed pulsar properties.
We present an extensive set of photometric and spectroscopic data for SN 2009jf, a nearby Type Ib supernova, spanning from ~20 days before B-band maximum to one year after maximum. We show that SN 2009jf is a slow evolving and energetic stripped-envelope SN and is likely from a massive progenitor (25-30 solar masses). The large progenitor's mass allows us to explain the complete hydrogen plus helium stripping without invoking the presence of a binary companion. The supernova occurred close to a young cluster, in a crowded environment with ongoing star-formation. The specroscopic similarity with the He-poor Type Ic SN 2007gr suggests a common progenitor for some supernovae Ib and Ic. The nebular spectra of SN 2009jf are consistent with an asymmetric explosion, with an off-center dense core. We also find evidence that He-rich Ib supernovae have a rise time longer than other stripped-envelope supernovae, however confirmation of this result and further observations are needed.
Two types of supernova are thought to produce the overwhelming majority of neutron stars in the Universe. The first type, iron-core collapse supernovae, occurs when a high-mass star develops a degenerate iron core that exceeds the Chandrasekhar limit. The second type, electron-capture supernovae, is associated with the collapse of a lower-mass oxygen-neon-magnesium core as it loses pressure support owing to the sudden capture of electrons by neon and/or magnesium nuclei. It has hitherto been impossible to identify the two distinct families of neutron stars produced in these formation channels. Here we report that a large, well-known class of neutron-star-hosting X-ray pulsars is actually composed of two distinct sub-populations with different characteristic spin periods, orbital periods and orbital eccentricities. This class, the Be/X-ray binaries, contains neutron stars that accrete material from a more massive companion star. The two sub-populations are most probably associated with the two distinct types of neutron-star-forming supernovae, with electron-capture supernovae preferentially producing system with short spin period, short orbital periods and low eccentricity. Intriguingly, the split between the two sub-populations is clearest in the distribution of the logarithm of spin period, a result that had not been predicted and which still remains to be explained.
OH(1720 MHz) masers are created by the interaction of supernova remnants with molecular clouds. These masers are pumped by collisions in warm, shocked molecular gas with OH column densities in the range 10^{16}--10^{17} cm^{-2}. Excitation calculations suggest that inversion of the 6049 MHz OH line may occur at the higher column densities that have been inferred from main-line absorption studies of supernova remnants with the Green Bank Telescope. OH(6049 MHz) masers have therefore been proposed as a complementary indicator of remnant-cloud interaction.   This motivated searches for 6049 MHz maser emission from supernova remnants using the Parkes 63 m and Effelsberg 100 m telescopes, and the Australia Telescope Compact Array. A total of forty-one remnants have been examined by one or more of these surveys, but without success. To check the accuracy of the OH column densities inferred from the single-dish observations we modelled OH absorption at 1667 MHz observed with the Very Large Array towards three supernova remnants, IC 443, W44 and 3C 391. The results are mixed -- the OH column is revised upwards in IC443, downwards in 3C391, and is somewhat reduced in W44. We conclude that OH columns exceeding 10^{17} cm^{-2} are indeed present in some supernova remnants and so the lack of any detections is not explained by low OH column density. We discuss the possibility that non-local line overlap is responsible for suppressing the inversion of the 6049 MHz line.
We present a new optical imaging survey of supernova remnants in M83, using data obtained with the Magellan I 6.5m telescope and IMACS instrument under conditions of excellent seeing. Using the criterion of strong [S II] emission relative to Halpha, we confirm all but three of the 71 SNR candidates listed in our previous survey, and expand the SNR candidate list to 225 objects, more than tripling the earlier sample. Comparing the optical survey with a new deep X-ray survey of M83 with Chandra, we find 61 of these SNR candidates to have X-ray counterparts. We also identify an additional list of 46 [O III] -selected nebulae for follow-up as potential ejecta-dominated remnants, seven of which have associated X-ray emission that makes them strong candidates. Some of the other [O III]-bright objects could also be normal ISM-dominated supernova remnants with shocks fast enough to doubly ionize oxygen, but with Halpha and [S II] emission faint enough to have been missed. A few of these objects may also be H II regions with abnormally high [O III] emission compared with the majority of M83 H II regions, compact nebulae excited by young Wolf-Rayet stars, or even background AGN. The supernova remnant Halpha luminosity function in M83 is shifted a factor of ~ 4.5x higher than for M33 supernova remnants, indicative of a higher mean ISM density in M83. We describe the search technique used to identify the supernova remnant candidates and provide basic information and finder charts for the objects.
We present previously unpublished photometry of supernovae 2003gs and 2003hv. Using spectroscopically-derived corrections to the U-band photometry, we reconcile U-band light curves made from imagery with the Cerro Tololo 0.9-m, 1.3-m and Las Campanas 1-m telescopes. Previously, such light curves showed a 0.4 mag spread at one month after maximum light. This gives us hope that a set of corrected ultraviolet light curves of nearby objects can contribute to the full utilization of rest frame U-band data of supernovae at redshift ~0.3 to 0.8. As pointed out recently by Kessler et al. in the context of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey supernova search, if we take the published U-band photometry of nearby Type Ia supernovae at face value, there is a 0.12 mag U-band anomaly in the distance moduli of higher redshift objects. This anomaly led the Sloan survey to eliminate from their analyses all photometry obtained in the rest frame U-band. The Supernova Legacy Survey eliminated observer frame U-band photometry, which is to say nearby objects observed in the U-band, but they used photometry of high redshift objects no matter in which band the photons were emitted.
We perform high resolution N-body+SPH simulations of isolated Milky-Way-like galaxies and major mergers between them, to investigate the effect of feedback from both an active galactic nucleus (AGN) and supernovae on the galaxy's evolution. Several AGN methods from the literature are used independently and in conjunction with supernova feedback to isolate the most important factors of these feedback processes. We find that in isolated galaxies, supernovae dominate the suppression of star formation but the star formation rate is unaffected by the presence of an AGN. In mergers the converse is true when models with strong AGN feedback are considered, shutting off star formation before a starburst can occur. AGN and supernovae simulated together suppress star formation only slightly more than if they acted independently. This low-level interaction between the feedback processes is due to AGN feedback maintaining the temperature of a hot halo of gas formed by supernovae. For each of the feedback processes the heating temperature is the dominant parameter rather than the overall energy budget or timing of heating events. Finally, we find that the black hole mass is highly resolution dependent, with more massive black holes found in lower resolution simulations.
A method was recently proposed which allows the conversion of the weak-lensing effects in the supernova Hubble diagram from noise into signal. Such signal is sensitive to the growth of structure in the universe, and in particular can be used as a measurement of $\sigma_8$ which is independent from more traditional methods such as those based on the CMB, cosmic shear or cluster abundance. We extend here that analysis to allow for intrinsic non-Gaussianities in the supernova PDF, and discuss how this can be best modelled using the Bayes Factor. Although it was shown that a precise measurement of $\sigma_8$ requires ~$10^5$ supernovae, current data already allows an important proof of principle. In particular we make use of the 732 supernovae with z < 1 of the recent JLA catalog and show that a simple treatment of intrinsic non-Gaussianities with a couple of nuisance parameters is enough for our method to yield the values $\sigma_8 = 0.84^{+0.28}_{-0.65}$ or $\sigma_8 < 1.45$ at a $2\sigma$ confidence level. This result is consistent with mock simulations and it is also in agreement with independent measurements and presents the first ever measurement of $\sigma_8$ using supernova magnitudes alone.
We apply a chemical evolution model to investigate the sources and evolution of dust in a sample of 26 high-redshift ($z>1$) submillimetre galaxies (SMGs) from the literature, with complete photometry from ultraviolet to the submillimetre. We show that dust produced only by low-intermediate mass stars falls a factor 240 short of the observed dust masses of SMGs, the well-known `dust-budget crisis'. Adding an extra source of dust from supernovae can account for the dust mass in 19 per cent of the SMG sample. Even after accounting for dust produced by supernovae the remaining deficit in the dust mass budget provides support for higher supernova yields, substantial grain growth in the interstellar medium or a top-heavy IMF. Including efficient destruction of dust by supernova shocks increases the tension between our model and observed SMG dust masses. The models which best reproduce the physical properties of SMGs have a rapid build-up of dust from both stellar and interstellar sources and minimal dust destruction. Alternatively, invoking a top-heavy IMF or significant changes in the dust grain properties can solve the dust budget crisis only if dust is produced by both low mass stars and supernovae and is not efficiently destroyed by supernova shocks.
We present a spectroscopic analysis of the H-alpha profiles of hydrogen-rich type II supernovae. A total of 52 type II supernovae having well sampled optical light curves and spectral sequences were analyzed. Concentrating on the H-alpha P-Cygni profile we measure its velocity from the FWHM of emission and the ratio of absorption to emission (a/e) at a common epoch at the start of the recombination phase, and search for correlations between these spectral parameters and photometric properties of the V-band light curves. Testing the strength of various correlations we find that a/e appears to be the dominant spectral parameter in terms of describing the diversity in our measured supernova properties. It is found that supernovae with smaller a/e have higher H-alpha velocities, more rapidly declining light curves from maximum, during the plateau and radioactive tail phase, are brighter at maximum light and have shorter optically thick phase durations. We discuss possible explanations of these results in terms of physical properties of type II supernovae, speculating that the most likely parameters which influence the morphologies of H-alpha profiles are the mass and density profile of the hydrogen envelope, together with additional emission components due to circumstellar interaction.
The origin of dust in galaxies is still a mystery. The majority of the refractory elements are produced in supernova explosions but it is unclear how and where dust grains condense and grow, and how they avoid destruction in the harsh environments of star-forming galaxies. The recent detection of 0.1-0.5 solar masses of dust in nearby supernova remnants suggests in situ dust formation, while other observations reveal very little dust in supernovae the first few years after explosion. Observations of the bright SN 2010jl have been interpreted as pre-existing dust, dust formation or no dust at all. Here we report the rapid (40-240 days) formation of dust in its dense circumstellar medium. The wavelength dependent extinction of this dust reveals the presence of very large (> 1 micron) grains, which are resistant to destructive processes. At later times (500-900 days), the near-IR thermal emission shows an accelerated growth in dust mass, marking the transition of the supernova from a circumstellar- to an ejecta-dominated source of dust. This provides the link between the early and late dust mass evolution in supernovae with dense circumstellar media.
The nature of the progenitor systems of type~Ia supernovae is still unclear. One way to distinguish between the single-degenerate scenario and double-degenerate scenario for their progenitors is to search for the surviving companions. Using a technique that couples the results from multi-dimensional hydrodynamics simulations with calculations of the structure and evolution of main-sequence- and helium-rich surviving companions, the color and magnitude of main-sequence- and helium-rich surviving companions are predicted as functions of time. The surviving companion candidates in Galactic type~Ia supernova remnants and nearby extragalactic type~Ia supernova remnants are discussed. We find that the maximum detectable distance of main-sequence surviving companions (helium-rich surviving companions) is $0.6-4$~Mpc ($0.4-16$~Mpc), if the apparent magnitude limit is 27 in the absence of extinction, suggesting that the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds and the Andromeda Galaxy are excellent environments in which to search for surviving companions. However, only five Ia~SNRs have been searched for surviving companions, showing little support for the standard channels in the singe-degenerate scenario. To better understand the progenitors of type Ia supernovae, we encourage the search for surviving companions in other nearby type Ia supernova remnants.
For the origin of heavy r-process elements, different sources have been proposed, e.g., core-collapse supernovae or neutron star mergers. Old metal-poor stars carry the signature of the astrophysical source(s). Among the elements dominantly made by the r-process, europium (Eu) is relatively easy to observe. In this work we simulate the evolution of europium in our galaxy with the inhomogeneous chemical evolution model 'ICE', and compare our results with spectroscopic observations. We test the most important parameters affecting the chemical evolution of Eu: (a) for neutron star mergers the coalescence time scale of the merger ($t_{\mathrm{coal}}$) and the probability to experience a neutron star merger event after two supernova explosions occurred and formed a double neutron star system ($P_{\mathrm{NSM}}$) and (b) for the sub-class of magneto-rotationally driven supernovae ("Jet-SNe"), their occurrence rate compared to standard supernovae ($P_{\mathrm{Jet-SN}}$). We find that the observed [Eu/Fe] pattern in the galaxy can be reproduced by a combination of neutron star mergers and magneto-rotationally driven supernovae as r-process sources. While neutron star mergers alone seem to set in at too high metallicities, Jet-SNe provide a cure for this deficiency at low metallicities. Furthermore, we confirm that local inhomogeneities can explain the observed large spread in the europium abundances at low metallicities. We also predict the evolution of [O/Fe] to test whether the spread in $\alpha$-elements for inhomogeneous models agrees with observations and whether this provides constraints on supernova explosion models and their nucleosynthesis.
The first supernovae will soon be visible at the edge of the observable universe, revealing the birthplaces of Population III stars. With upcoming near-infrared missions, a broad analysis of the detectability of high-$z$ supernovae is paramount. We combine cosmological and radiation transport simulations, instrument specifications, and survey strategies to create synthetic observations of primeval core-collapse, Type IIn and pair-instability supernovae with the James Webb Space Telescope ($JWST$). We show that a dedicated observational campaign with the $JWST$ can detect up to $\sim 15$ pair-instability explosions, $\sim 300$ core-collapse supernovae, but less than one Type IIn explosion per year, depending on the Population III star formation history. Our synthetic survey also shows that $\approx 1-2 \times10^2$ supernovae detections, depending on the accuracy of the classification, are sufficient to discriminate between a Salpeter and flat mass distribution for high redshift stars with a confidence level greater than 99.5 per cent. We discuss how the purity of the sample affects our results and how supervised learning methods may help to discriminate between CC and PI SNe.
We present results of a systematic study of the mass-loss properties of Type IIn supernova progenitors within decades before their explosion. We apply an analytic light curve model to 11 Type IIn supernova bolometric light curves to derive the circumstellar medium properties. We reconstruct the mass-loss histories based on the estimated circumstellar medium properties. The estimated mass-loss rates are mostly higher than 1e-3 Msun/yr and they are consistent with those obtained by other methods. The mass-loss rates are often found to be constantly high within decades before their explosion. This indicates that there exists some mechanism to sustain the high mass-loss rates of Type IIn supernova progenitors for at least decades before their explosion. Thus, the shorter eruptive mass loss events observed in some Type IIn supernova progenitors are not always responsible for creating their dense circumstellar media. In addition, we find that Type IIn supernova progenitors may tend to increase their mass-loss rates as they approach to the time of their explosion. We also show a detailed comparison between our analytic prediction and numerical results.
X-ray measurements suggest the abundance of Calcium in the intracluster medium is higher than can be explained using favored models for core-collapse and Type Ia supernovae alone. We investigate whether the Calcium conundrum in the intracluster medium can be alleviated by including a contribution from the recently discovered subclass of supernovae known as Calcium-rich gap transients. Although the Calcium-rich gap transients make up only a small fraction of all supernovae events, we find that their high Calcium yields are sufficient to reproduce the X-ray measurements found for nearby rich clusters. We find the $\chi^{2}$ goodness-of-fit metric improves from 84 to 2 by including this new class. Moreover, Calcium-rich supernovae preferentially occur in the outskirts of galaxies making it easier for the nucleosynthesis products of these events to be incorporated in the intracluster medium via ram-pressure stripping. The discovery of a Calcium-rich gap transients in clusters and groups far from any individual galaxy suggests supernovae associated with intracluster stars may play an important role in enriching the intracluster medium. Calcium-rich gap transients may also help explain anomalous Calcium abundances in many other astrophysical systems including individual stars in the Milky Way, the halos of nearby galaxies and the circumgalactic medium. Our work highlights the importance of considering the diversity of supernovae types and corresponding yields when modeling the abundance of the intracluster medium and other gas reservoirs.
Based on early solar system abundances of short-lived radionuclides (SRs), such as $^{26}$Al (T$_{1/2} = 0.74$ Myr) and $^{60}$Fe (T$_{1/2} = 1.5$ Myr), it is often asserted that the Sun was born in a large stellar cluster, where a massive star contaminated the protoplanetary disk with freshly nucleosynthesized isotopes from its supernova (SN) explosion. To account for the inferred initial solar system abundances of short-lived radionuclides, this supernova had to be close ($\sim$ 0.3 pc) to the young ($\leqslant$ 1 Myr) protoplanetary disk.   Here we show that massive star evolution timescales are too long, compared to typical timescales of star formation in embedded clusters, for them to explode as supernovae within the lifetimes of nearby disks. This is especially true in an Orion Nebular Cluster (ONC)-type of setting, where the most massive star will explode as a supernova $\sim$ 5 Myr after the onset of star formation, when nearby disks will have already suffered substantial photoevaporation and/or formed large planetesimals.   We quantify the probability for {\it any} protoplanetary disk to receive SRs from a nearby supernova at the level observed in the early solar system. Key constraints on our estimate are: (1) SRs have to be injected into a newly formed ($\leqslant$ 1 Myr) disk, (2) the disk has to survive UV photoevaporation, and (3) the protoplanetary disk must be situated in an enrichment zone permitting SR injection at the solar system level without disk disruption. The probability of protoplanetary disk contamination by a supernova ejecta is, in the most favorable case, 3 $\times$ 10$^{-3}$.
We have carried out a detailed study of the single-degenerate channel for the progenitors of type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). In the model, a carbon-oxygen white dwarf (CO WD) accretes hydrogen-rich material from an unevolved or a slightly evolved non-degenerate companion to increase its mass to Chandrasekhar mass limit. Incorporating the prescription of \cite{HAC99a} for the accretion efficiency into Eggleton's stellar evolution code and assuming that the prescription is valid for all metallicities, we performed binary stellar evolution calculations for more than 25,000 close WD binary systems with various metallicities. The initial parameter spaces for SNe Ia are presented in an orbital period-secondary mass ($\log P_{\rm i}, M_{\rm 2}^{\rm i}$) plane for each $Z$.   Adopting the results above, we studied the birth rate of SNe Ia for various $Z$ via binary population synthesis. From the study, we see that for a high $Z$, SNe Ia occur systemically earlier and the peak value of the birth rate is larger if a single starburst is assumed. The Galactic birth rate from the channel is lower than (but comparable to) that inferred from observations.   We also showed the distributions of the parameters of the binary systems at the moment of supernova explosion and the distributions of the properties of companions after supernova explosion. The former provides physics input to simulate the interaction between supernova ejecta and its companion, and the latter is helpful to search for the companions in supernova remnants.
Several short-lived radionuclides (SLRs) were present in the early solar system, some of which should have formed just prior to or soon after the solar system formation. Stellar nucleosynthesis has been proposed as the mechanism for production of SLRs in the solar system, but no appropriate stellar source has been found to explain the abundances of all solar system SLRs.   In this study, we propose a faint supernova with mixing and fallback as a stellar source of SLRs with mean lives of <5 Myr (26Al, 41Ca, 53Mn, and 60Fe) in the solar system. In such a supernova, the inner region of the exploding star experiences mixing, a small fraction of mixed materials is ejected, and the rest undergoes fallback onto the core. The modeled SLR abundances agree well with their solar system abundances if mixing-fallback occurs within the C/O-burning layer. In some cases, the initial solar system abundances of the SLRs can be reproduced within a factor of 2. The dilution factor of supernova ejecta to the solar system materials is ~10E-4 and the time interval between the supernova explosion and the formation of oldest solid materials in the solar system is ~1 Myr. If the dilution occurred due to spherically symmetric expansion, a faint supernova should have occurred nearby the solar system forming region in a star cluster.
Core-collapse supernovae are among Nature's most energetic events. They mark the end of massive star evolution and pollute the interstellar medium with the life-enabling ashes of thermonuclear burning. Despite their importance for the evolution of galaxies and life in the universe, the details of the core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism remain in the dark and pose a daunting computational challenge. We outline the multi-dimensional, multi-scale, and multi-physics nature of the core-collapse supernova problem and discuss computational strategies and requirements for its solution. Specifically, we highlight the axisymmetric (2D) radiation-MHD code VULCAN/2D and present results obtained from the first full-2D angle-dependent neutrino radiation-hydrodynamics simulations of the post-core-bounce supernova evolution. We then go on to discuss the new code Zelmani which is based on the open-source HPC Cactus framework and provides a scalable AMR approach for 3D fully general-relativistic modeling of stellar collapse, core-collapse supernovae and black hole formation on current and future massively-parallel HPC systems. We show Zelmani's scaling properties to more than 16,000 compute cores and discuss first 3D general-relativistic core-collapse results.
A generic prediction of the single-degenerate model for Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) is that a significant amount of material will be stripped from the donor star (~0.5 Msun for a giant donor and ~0.15 Msun for a main sequence donor) by the supernova ejecta. This material, excited by gamma-rays from radioactive decay, would then produce relatively narrow (1000 km s-1) emission features observable once the supernova enters the nebular phase. Such emission has never been detected, which already provides strong constraints on Type Ia progenitor models. In this Letter we report the deepest limit yet on the presence of H-alpha emission originating from the stripped hydrogen in the nebular spectrum of a Type Ia supernova obtained using a high signal-to-noise spectrum of the nearby normal SN Ia 2011fe 274 days after B-band maximum light with the Large Binocular Telescope's Multi-Object Double Spectrograph. We put a conservative upper limit on the H-alpha flux of 3.14 x 10^-17 erg s-1 cm-2, which corresponds to a luminosity of 1.57 x 10^35 erg s-1. By scaling models from the literature, our flux limit translates into an upper limit of 0.001 Msun of stripped material. This is an order of magnitude stronger than previous limits. SN 2011fe was a typical Type Ia supernova, special only in its proximity, and we argue that lack of hydrogen emission in its nebular spectrum adds yet another strong constraint on the single degenerate class of models for SNe Ia.
Some fraction of the material ejected in a core collapse supernova explosion may remain bound to the compact remnant, and eventually turn around and fall back. We show that the late time (> days) power associated with the accretion of this "fallback" material may significantly affect the optical light curve, in some cases producing super-luminous or otherwise peculiar supernovae. We use spherically symmetric hydrodynamical models to estimate the accretion rate at late times for a range of progenitor masses and radii and explosion energies. The accretion rate onto the proto-neutron star or black hole decreases as Mdot ~ t^-5/3 at late times, but its normalization can be significantly enhanced at low explosion energies, in very massive stars, or if a strong reverse shock wave forms at the helium/hydrogen interface in the progenitor. If the resulting super-Eddington accretion drives an outflow which thermalizes in the outgoing ejecta, the supernova debris will be re-energized at a time when photons can diffuse out efficiently. The resulting light curves are different and more diverse than previous fallback supernova models which ignored the input of accretion power and produced short-lived, dim transients. The possible outcomes when fallback accretion power is significant include super-luminous (> 10^44 ergs / s) Type II events of both short and long durations, as well as luminous Type I events from compact stars that may have experienced significant mass loss. Accretion power may unbind the remaining infalling material, causing a sudden decrease in the brightness of some long duration Type II events. This scenario may be relevant for explaining some of the recently discovered classes of peculiar and rare supernovae.
Various lines of evidence suggest that very massive stars experience extreme mass-loss episodes shortly before they explode as a supernova. Interestingly, several models predict such pre-explosion outbursts. Establishing a causal connection between these mass-loss episodes and the final supernova explosion will provide a novel way to study pre-supernova massive-star evolution. Here we report on observations of a remarkable mass-loss event detected 40 days prior to the explosion of the Type IIn supernova SN 2010mc (PTF 10tel). Our photometric and spectroscopic data suggest that this event is a result of an energetic outburst, radiating at least 6x10^47 erg of energy, and releasing about 0.01 Solar mass at typical velocities of 2000 km/s. We show that the temporal proximity of the mass-loss outburst and the supernova explosion implies a causal connection between them. Moreover, we find that the outburst luminosity and velocity are consistent with the predictions of the wave-driven pulsation model and disfavor alternative suggestions.
As a solution to the well-known problem that the shock wave potentially responsible for the explosion of a supernova actually tends to stall, we propose a new energy source arising from our model for dark matter. Our earlier model proposed that dark matter should consist of cm-large white dwarf-like objects kept together by a skin separating two different sorts of vacua. These dark matter balls or pearls will collect in the middle of any star throughout its lifetime. At some stage during the development of a supernova the balls will begin to take in neutrons and then other surrounding material. By passing into a ball nucleons fall through a potential of order 10 MeV, causing a severe production of heat - of order 10 foe for a solar mass of material eaten by the balls. The temperature in the iron core will thereby be raised, splitting up the iron into smaller nuclei. This provides a mechanism for reviving the shock wave when it arrives and making the supernova explosion really occur. The onset of the heating due to the dark matter balls would at first stop the collapse of the supernova progenitor. This opens up the possibility of there being {\em two} collapses giving two neutrino outbursts, as apparently seen in the supernova SN1987A - one in Mont Blanc, and one 4 hours 43 minutes later in both IMB and Kamiokande.
We study the magnetic field evolution of an isolated spiral galaxy, using isolated Milky Way-mass galaxy formation simulations and a novel prescription for magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) supernova feedback. Our main result is that a galactic dynamo can be seeded and driven by supernova explosions, resulting in magnetic fields whose strength and morphology is consistent with observations. In our model, supernovae supply thermal energy, and a low level magnetic field along with their ejecta. The thermal expansion drives turbulence, which serves a dual role by efficiently mixing the magnetic field into the interstellar medium, and amplifying it by means of turbulent dynamo. The computational prescription for MHD supernova feedback has been implemented within the publicly available ENZO code, and is fully described in this paper. This improves upon ENZO's existing modules for hydrodynamic feedback from stars and active galaxies. We find that the field attains $\mu G$-levels over Gyr-time scales throughout the disk. The field also develops large-scale structure, which appears to be correlated with the disk's spiral arm density structure. We find that seeding of the galactic dynamo by supernova ejecta predicts a persistent correlation between gas metallicity and magnetic field strength. We also generate all-sky maps of the Faraday rotation measure from the simulation-predicted magnetic field, and present a direct comparison with observations.
We present fits of generalized semi-analytic supernova (SN) light curve (LC) models for a variety of power inputs including Ni-56 and Co-56 radioactive decay, magnetar spin-down, and forward and reverse shock heating due to supernova ejecta-circumstellar matter (CSM) interaction. We apply our models to the observed LCs of the H-rich Super Luminous Supernovae (SLSN-II) SN 2006gy, SN 2006tf, SN 2008am, SN 2008es, CSS100217, the H-poor SLSN-I SN 2005ap, SCP06F6, SN 2007bi, SN 2010gx and SN 2010kd as well as to the interacting SN 2008iy and PTF09uj. Our goal is to determine the dominant mechanism that powers the LCs of these extraordinary events and the physical conditions involved in each case. We also present a comparison of our semi-analytical results with recent results from numerical radiation hydrodynamics calculations in the particular case of SN 2006gy in order to explore the strengths and weaknesses of our models. We find that CS shock heating produced by ejecta-CSM interaction provides a better fit to the LCs of most of the events we examine. We discuss the possibility that collision of supernova ejecta with hydrogen-deficient CSM accounts for some of the hydrogen-deficient SLSNe (SLSN-I) and may be a plausible explanation for the explosion mechanism of SN 2007bi, the pair-instability supernova (PISN) candidate. We characterize and discuss issues of parameter degeneracy.
The explosion energy and the ejecta mass of a type IIP supernova make up the basis for the theory of explosion mechanism. So far, these parameters have only been determined for seven events. Type IIP supernova 2008in is another well-observed event for which a detailed hydrodynamic modeling can be used to derive the supernova parameters. Hydrodynamic modeling was employed to describe the bolometric light curve and the expansion velocities at the photosphere level. A time-dependent model for hydrogen ionization and excitation was applied to model the Halpha and Hbeta line profiles. We found an ejecta mass of 13.6 Msun, an explosion energy of 5.05x10^50 erg, a presupernova radius of 570 Rsun, and a radioactive Ni-56 mass of 0.015 Msun. The estimated progenitor mass is 15.5 Msun. We uncovered a problem of the Halpha and Hbeta description at the early phase, which cannot be resolved within a spherically symmetric model. The presupernova of SN 2008in was a normal red supergiant with the minimum mass of the progenitor among eight type IIP supernovae explored by means of the hydrodynamic modeling. The problem of the absence of type IIP supernovae with the progenitor masses <15 Msun in this sample remains open.
A recently proposed technique allows one to constrain both the background and perturbation cosmological parameters through the distribution function of supernova Ia apparent magnitudes. Here we extend this technique to alternative cosmological scenarios, in which the growth of structure does not follow the $\Lambda$CDM prescription. We apply the method first to the supernova data provided by the JLA catalog combined with all the current independent redshift distortion data and with low-redshift cluster data from Chandra and show that although the supernovae alone are not very constraining, they help in reducing the confidence regions. Then we apply our method to future data from LSST and from a survey that approximates the Euclid satellite mission. In this case we show that the combined data are nicely complementary and can constrain the normalization $\sigma_8$ and the growth rate index $\gamma$ to within $0.6\%$ and $7\%$, respectively. In particular, the LSST supernova catalog is forecast to give the constraint $\gamma (\sigma_8/0.83)^{6.7} = 0.55 \pm 0.1$. We also report on constraints relative to a step-wise parametrization of the growth rate of structures. These results show that supernova lensing serves as a good cross-check on the measurement of perturbation parameters from more standard techniques.
Core-collapse supernovae produce an intense burst of electron antineutrinos in the few-tens-of-MeV range. Several Large Liquid Scintillator-based Detectors (LLSD) are currently operated worldwide, being very effective for low energy antineutrino detection through the Inverse Beta Decay (IBD) process. In this article, we develop a procedure for the prompt extraction of the supernova location by revisiting the details of IBD kinematics over the broad energy range of supernova neutrinos. Combining all current scintillator-based detector, we show that one can locate a canonical supernova at 10 kpc with an accuracy of 45 degrees (68% C.L.). After the addition of the next generation of scintillator-based detectors, the accuracy could reach 12 degrees (68% C.L.), therefore reaching the performances of the large water Cerenkov neutrino detectors. We also discuss a possible improvement of the SuperNova Early Warning System (SNEWS) inter-experiment network with the implementation of a directionality information in each experiment. Finally, we discuss the possibility to constrain the neutrino energy spectrum as well as the mass of the newly born neutron star with the LLSD data
We apply deep recurrent neural networks, which are capable of learning complex sequential information, to classify supernovae\footnote{Code available at \href{https://github.com/adammoss/supernovae}{https://github.com/adammoss/supernovae}}. The observational time and filter fluxes are used as inputs to the network, but since the inputs are agnostic additional data such as host galaxy information can also be included. Using the Supernovae Photometric Classification Challenge (SPCC) data, we find that deep networks are capable of learning about light curves, however the performance of the network is highly sensitive to the amount of training data. For a training size of 50\% of the representational SPCC dataset (around $10^4$ supernovae) we obtain a type-Ia vs. non-type-Ia classification accuracy of 94.7\%, an area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic curve AUC of 0.986 and a SPCC figure-of-merit $F_1=0.64$. When using only the data for the early-epoch challenge defined by the SPCC we achieve a classification accuracy of 93.1\%, AUC of 0.977 and $F_1=0.58$, results almost as good as with the whole light-curve. By employing bidirectional neural networks we can acquire impressive classification results between supernovae types -I,~-II and~-III at an accuracy of 90.4\% and AUC of 0.974. We also apply a pre-trained model to obtain classification probabilities as a function of time, and show it can give early indications of supernovae type. Our method is competitive with existing algorithms and has applications for future large-scale photometric surveys.
With the upcoming sky survey with the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope a great sample of type Ia supernovae will be observed, allowing for a precise mapping of the velocity structure of the universe. Since the source of peculiar velocities is variations in the density field, cosmological parameters related to the matter distribution can subsequently be extracted from the velocity power spectrum.   One way to quantify this is through the angular power spectrum of radial peculiar velocities on spheres at different redshifts. We investigate how well this observable can be measured, despite the problems caused by areas with no information. To obtain a realistic distribution of supernovae, we create mock supernova catalogs by using a semi-analytical code for galaxy formation on the merger trees extracted from N-body simulations. We measure the cosmic variance in the velocity power spectrum by repeating the procedure many times for differently located observers, and vary different aspects of the analysis, such as the observer environment, to see how this affects the measurements.   Our results confirm the findings from earlier studies regarding the precision with which the angular velocity power spectrum can be determined in the near future. This level of precision has been found to imply, that the angular velocity power spectrum from type Ia supernovae is competitive in its potential to measure parameters such as $\sigma_8$. This makes the peculiar velocity power spectrum from type Ia supernovae a promising new observable, which deserves further attention.
We examine the bolometric lightcurves of five Type II-P supernovae (SNe 1998A, 2000cb, 2006V, 2006au and 2009E) which are thought to originate from blue supergiant progenitors using a new python package named SuperBoL. With this code, we calculate SNe lightcurves using three different techniques common in the literature: the quasi-bolometric method, which integrates the observed photometry, the direct integration method, which additionally corrects for unobserved flux in the UV and IR, and the bolometric correction method, which uses correlations between observed colors and V-band bolometric corrections. We present here the lightcurves calculated by SuperBoL along with previously published lightcurves, as well as peak luminosities and Ni-56 yields. We find that the direct integration and bolometric correction lightcurves largely agree with previously published lightcurves, but with what we believe to be more robust error calculations, with $0.2 \leq \delta L_{bol}/L_{bol} \leq 0.5$. Peak luminosities and Ni-56 masses are similarly comparable to previous work. SN 2000cb remains an unusual member of this sub-group, owing to the faster rise and flatter plateau than the other supernovae in the sample. Initial comparisons with the NLTE atmosphere code PHOENIX show that the direct integration technique re-produces the luminosity of a model supernova spectrum to ~5% when given synthetic photometry of the spectrum as input. Our code is publicly available. The ability to produce bolometric lightcurves from observed sets of broad-band light curves should be helpful in the interpretation of other types of supernovae, particularly those that are not well characterized, such as extremely luminous supernovae and faint fast objects.
The rate of type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) in a galaxy depends not only on stellar mass, but also on star formation history. Here we show that two simple observational quantities ($g-r$ or $u-r$ host galaxy color, and $r$-band luminosity), coupled with an assumed delay time distribution (the rate of SNe Ia as a function of time for an instantaneous burst of star formation), are sufficient to accurately determine a galaxy's SN Ia rate, with very little sensitivity to the precise details of the star formation history. Using this result, we compare observed and predicted color distributions of SN Ia hosts for the MENeaCS cluster supernova survey, and for the SDSS Stripe 82 supernova survey. The observations are consistent with a continuous delay time distribution (DTD), without any cutoff. For old progenitor systems the power-law slope for the DTD is found to be $-1.50 ^{+0.19} _{-0.15}$. This result favours the double degenerate scenario for SN Ia, though other interpretations are possible. We find that the late-time slopes of the delay time distribution are different at the 1$\sigma$ level for low and high stretch supernova, which suggest a single degenerate scenario for the latter. However, due to ambiguity in the current models' DTD predictions, single degenerate progenitors can neither be confirmed as causing high stretch supernovae nor ruled out from contributing to the overall sample.
The coming era of large photometric wide-field surveys will increase the detection rate of supernovae by orders of magnitude. Such numbers will restrict spectroscopic follow-up in the vast majority of cases, and hence new methods based solely on photometric data must be developed. Here, we construct a complete Hubble diagram of Type II supernovae combining data from three different samples: the Carnegie Supernova Project-I, the Sloan Digital Sky Survey-II SN, and the Supernova Legacy Survey. Applying the Photometric Colour Method (PCM) to 73 Type II supernovae (SNe~II) with a redshift range of 0.01--0.5 and with no spectral information, we derive an intrinsic dispersion of 0.35 mag. A comparison with the Standard Candle Method (SCM) using 61 SNe~II is also performed and an intrinsic dispersion in the Hubble diagram of 0.27 mag is derived, i.e., 13\% in distance uncertainties. Due to the lack of good statistics at higher redshifts for both methods, only weak constraints on the cosmological parameters are obtained. However, assuming a flat Universe and using the PCM, we derive a Universe's matter density: $\Omega_{m}$=0.32$^{+0.30}_{-0.21}$ providing a new independent evidence for dark energy at the level of two sigma.
The explosion energy of thermonuclear (Type Ia) supernovae is derived from the difference in nuclear binding energy liberated in the explosive fusion of light 'fuel' nuclei, predominantly carbon and oxygen, into more tightly bound nuclear 'ash' dominated by iron and silicon group elements. The very same explosive thermonuclear fusion event is also one of the major processes contributing to the nucleosynthesis of the heavy elements, in particular the iron-group elements. For example, most of the iron and manganese in the sun and its planetary system were produced in thermonuclear supernovae. Here, we review the physics of explosive thermonuclear burning in carbon-oxygen white dwarf material and the methodologies utilized in calculating predicted nucleosynthesis from hydrodynamic explosion models. While the dominant explosion scenario remains unclear, many aspects of the nuclear combustion and nucleosynthesis are common to all models and must occur in some form in order to produce the observed yields. We summarize the predicted nucleosynthetic yields for existing explosion models, placing particular emphasis on characteristic differences in the nucleosynthetic signatures of the different suggested scenarios leading to Type Ia supernovae. Following this, we discuss how these signatures compare with observations of several individual supernovae, remnants, and the composition of material in our galaxy and galaxy clusters.
Extended material at large radii surrounding a supernova can result in a double-peaked light curve. This occurs when the material is sufficiently massive that the supernova shock continues to propagate into it and sufficiently extended that it produces a bright first peak. Such material can be the leftover, low-mass envelope of a star that has been highly stripped, the mass associated with a wind, or perhaps mass surrounding the progenitor due to some type of pre-explosion activity. I summarize the conditions necessary for such a light curve to occur, describe what can be learned about the extended material from the light curve shape, and provide an analytic model for fitting the first peak in these double-peaked supernovae. This is applied to the specific case of a Type Ic super-luminous supernova, LSQ14bdq. The mass in the extended material around this explosion's progenitor is measured to be small, ~0.3-0.5 Msun. The radius of this material can be ~500-5000 Rsun, but it is difficult to constrain due to a degeneracy between radius and the supernova's energy. In the future, spectra taken during the first peak will be important for measuring the velocity and composition of the extended material so that this degeneracy can be overcome.
Light dark matter($\simeq 1-30~\rm{MeV}$) particles pair produced in electron-positron annihilation $ e^-e^+ \stackrel{\gamma}{\longrightarrow} \chi \bar{\chi}$ inside the supernova core can take away the energy released in the supernova SN1987A explosion. Working within the formalism of $q$-deformed statistics (with the average value of the supernovae core temperature(fluctuating) being $T_{SN} = 30~\rm{MeV}$) and using the Raffelt's criterion on the emissivity for any new channel $\dot{\varepsilon}(e^+ e^- \to \chi \overline{\chi}) \le 10^{19}~{erg~g^{-1}s^{-1}}$, we find that as the deformation parameter $q$ changes from $1.0$ (undeformed scenario) to $1.1$(deformed scenario), the lower bound on the scale $\Lambda$ of the dark matter effective theory varies from $3.3\times 10^6$ TeV to $3.2 \times 10^7$ TeV for a dark matter fermion of mass $m_\chi = 30~\rm{MeV}$. Using the optical depth criteria on the free streaming of the dark matter fermion, we find the lower bound on $\Lambda \sim 10^{8}~\rm{TeV}$ for $m_\chi = 30~\rm{MeV}$. In a scenerio,where the dark matter fermions are pair produced in the outermost sector of the supernova core (with radius $0.9 R_c \le r \le R_c$, $R_c (=10~\rm{km})$ being the supernova core radius or the radius of proto-neutron star), we find that the bound on $\Lambda$ ($\sim 3 \times 10^7$ TeV)obtained from SN cooling criteria (Raffelt's criteria) is comparable with the bound obtained from free streaming (optical depth criterion) for light fermion dark matter of mass $m_{\chi}=10 - 30$ MeV.
Previous studies have shown that the radiation emitted by a rapidly rotating magnetar embedded in a young supernova can greatly amplify its luminosity. These one-dimensional studies have also revealed the existence of an instability arising from the piling up of radiatively accelerated matter in a thin dense shell deep inside the supernova. Here we examine the problem in two dimensions and find that, while instabilities cause mixing and fracture this shell into filamentary structures that reduce the density contrast, the concentration of matter in a hollow shell persists. The extent of the mixing depends upon the relative energy input by the magnetar and the kinetic energy of the inner ejecta. The light curve and spectrum of the resulting supernova will be appreciably altered, as will the appearance of the supernova remnant, which will be shellular and filamentary. A similar pile up and mixing might characterize other events where energy is input over an extended period by a centrally concentrated source, e.g. a pulsar, radioactive decay, a neutrino-powered wind, or colliding shells. The relevance of our models to the recent luminous transient ASASSN-15lh is briefly discussed.
We study the production of sterile neutrinos in supernovae, focusing in particular on the keV--MeV mass range, which is the most interesting range if sterile neutrinos are to account for the dark matter in the Universe. Focusing on the simplest scenario in which sterile neutrinos mixes only with muon or tau neutrino, we argue that the production of keV--MeV sterile neutrinos can be strongly enhanced by a Mikheyev--Smirnov--Wolfenstein (MSW) resonance, so that a substantial flux is expected to emerge from a supernova, even if vacuum mixing angles between active and sterile neutrinos are tiny. Using energetics arguments, this yields limits on the sterile neutrino parameter space that reach down to mixing angles of the order of $\sin^2 2\theta \lesssim 10^{-14}$ and are up to an order of magnitude stronger than those from X-ray observations. While supernova limits suffer from larger systematic uncertainties than X-ray limits they apply also to scenarios in which sterile neutrinos are not abundantly produced in the early Universe. We also compute the flux of $\mathcal{O}(\text{MeV})$ photons expected from the decay of sterile neutrinos produced in supernovae, but find that it is beyond current observational reach even for a nearby supernova.
We review the lives, deaths and nucleosynthetic signatures of intermediate mass stars in the range approximately 6.5-12 Msun, which form super-AGB stars near the end of their lives. We examine the critical mass boundaries both between different types of massive white dwarfs (CO, CO-Ne, ONe) and between white dwarfs and supernovae and discuss the relative fraction of super-AGB stars that end life as either an ONe white dwarf or as a neutron star (or an ONeFe white dwarf), after undergoing an electron capture supernova. We also discuss the contribution of the other potential single-star channels to electron-capture supernovae, that of the failed massive stars. We describe the factors that influence these different final fates and mass limits, such as composition, the efficiency of convection, rotation, nuclear reaction rates, mass loss rates, and third dredge-up efficiency. We stress the importance of the binary evolution channels for producing electron-capture supernovae. We discuss recent nucleosynthesis calculations and elemental yield results and present a new set of s-process heavy element yield predictions. We assess the contribution from super-AGB star nucleosynthesis in a Galactic perspective, and consider the (super-)AGB scenario in the context of the multiple stellar populations seen in globular clusters. A brief summary of recent works on dust production is included. Lastly we conclude with a discussion of the observational constraints and potential future advances for study into these stars on the low mass/high mass star boundary.
The metal abundance of the hot plasma that permeates galaxy clusters represents the accumulation of heavy elements produced by billions of supernovae. Therefore, X-ray spectroscopy of the intracluster medium provides an opportunity to investigate the nature of supernova explosions integrated over cosmic time. In particular, the abundance of the iron-peak elements (chromium, manganese, iron and nickel) is key to understanding how the progenitors of typical type Ia supernovae evolve and explode. Recent X-ray studies of the intracluster medium found that the abundance ratios of these elements differ substantially from those seen in the Sun, suggesting differences between the nature of type Ia supernovae in the clusters and in the Milky Way. However, because the K-shell transition lines of chromium and manganese are weak and those of iron and nickel are very close in photon energy, high-resolution spectroscopy is required for an accurate determination of the abundances of these elements. Here we report observations of the Perseus cluster, with statistically significant detections of the resonance emission from chromium, manganese and nickel. Our measurements, combined with the latest atomic models, reveal that these elements have near-solar abundance ratios with respect to iron, in contrast to previous claims. Comparison between our results and modern nucleosynthesis calculations disfavours the hypothesis that type Ia supernova progenitors are exclusively white dwarfs with masses well below the Chandrasekhar limit (about 1.4 times the mass of the Sun). The observed abundance pattern of the iron-peak elements can be explained by taking into account a combination of near- and sub-Chandrasekhar-mass type Ia supernova systems, adding to the mounting evidence that both progenitor types make a substantial contribution to cosmic chemical enrichment.
The remnant of supernova explosion is widely believed to be the acceleration site of high-energy cosmic ray particles. The acceleration timescale is, however, typically very long. Here we report the detection of a variable $\gamma$-ray source with the Fermi Large Area Telescope, which is positionally and temporally consistent with a peculiar supernova, iPTF14hls. A quasi-stellar object SDSS J092054.04+504251.5, which is probably a blazar according to the infrared data, is found in the error circle of the $\gamma$-ray source. More data about the $\gamma$-ray source and SDSS J092054.04+504251.5 are needed to confirm their association. On the other hand, if the association between the $\gamma$-ray source and the supernova is confirmed, this would be the first time to detect high-energy $\gamma$-ray emission from a supernova, suggesting very fast particle acceleration by supernova explosions.
A strong bound on the properties of axion-like particles (ALPs) has been set by assuming that ALPs are emitted by the protoneutron star just before the core-bounce in Galactic core-collapse supernovae, and that these ALPs subsequently convert to $\gamma$-ray photons which ought to be detected by a $\gamma$-ray mission. This argument has been applied to supernova 1987A to derive the bound on the ALP-photon coupling $g_{a \gamma \gamma} \lesssim 5.3 \cdot 10^{- 12} \, {\rm GeV}^{- 1}$ for an ALP mass $m_a \lesssim 4.4 \cdot 10^{- 10} \, {\rm eV}$, and can be applied to the next Galactic supernova to derive the even stronger bound $g_{a \gamma \gamma} \lesssim 2 \cdot 10^{- 13} \, {\rm GeV}^{- 1}$ for an ALP mass $m_a \lesssim 10^{- 9} \, {\rm eV}$. We carefully analyze the considered ALP production mechanism and find that it is oversimplified to an unacceptable extent. By taking into account the minimal ingredients required by a realistic analysis, we conclude that the previous results are doomed to failure. As a consequence, all papers quoting the above bound should be properly revised. Yet, since we are unable to rule out the possibility that protoneutron stars emit ALPs, in case a core-collapse supernova explodes in the Galaxy the $\gamma$-ray satellite missions active at that time should look for photons possibly coming from the supernova.
We present Keck spectroscopic observations of three probable high redshift superluminous supernovae (SLSNe) from the Subaru HIgh-Z sUpernova CAmpaign (SHIZUCA), confirming redshifts of 1.851, 1.965 and 2.399. The host galaxies were selected for transient monitoring from multi-band photometric redshifts. The supernovae are detected during their rise, and the classically scheduled spectra are collected near maximum light. The restframe far-ultraviolet (FUV;$\sim$1000A-2500A) spectra include a significant host galaxy flux contribution and we compare our host galaxy subtracted spectra to UV-luminous SNe from the literature. While the signal-to-noise ratios of the spectra presented here are sufficient for redshift confirmation, supernova spectroscopic type confirmation remains inconclusive. The success of the first SHIZUCA Keck spectroscopic follow-up program demonstrates that campaigns such as SHIZUCA are capable of identifying high redshift SLSNe with sufficient accuracy, speed and depth for rapid, well-cadenced and informative follow-up.
It is difficult to establish the properties of massive stars that explode as supernovae. The electromagnetic emission during the first minutes to hours after the emergence of the shock from the stellar surface conveys important information about the final evolution and structure of the exploding star. However, the unpredictable nature of supernova events hinders the detection of this brief initial phase. Here we report the serendipitous discovery of a newly born, normal type IIb supernova (SN 2016gkg), which reveals a rapid brightening at optical wavelengths of about 40 magnitudes per day. The very frequent sampling of the observations allowed us to study in detail the outermost structure of the progenitor of the supernova and the physics of the emergence of the shock. We develop hydrodynamical models of the explosion that naturally account for the complete evolution of the supernova over distinct phases regulated by different physical processes. This result suggests that it is appropriate to decouple the treatment of the shock propagation from the unknown mechanism that triggers the explosion.
Oxygen-rich young supernova remnants are valuable objects for probing the outcome of nucleosynthetic processes in massive stars, as well as the physics of supernova explosions. Observed within a few thousand years after the supernova explosion, these systems contain fast-moving oxygen-rich and hydrogen-poor filaments visible at optical wavelengths: fragments of the progenitor's interior expelled at a few 1000 km/s during the supernova explosion. Here we report the first identification of the compact object in 1E0102.2-7219 in reprocessed Chandra X-ray Observatory data, enabled via the discovery of a ring-shaped structure visible primarily in optical recombination lines of Ne I and O I. The optical ring, discovered in integral field spectroscopy observations from the Multi Unit Spectroscopic Explorer (MUSE) at the Very Large Telescope, has a radius of $(2.10\pm0.35)$ arcsec = $(0.63\pm0.11)$ pc, and is expanding at a velocity of $90.5_{-30}^{+40}$ km/s. It surrounds an X-ray point source with an intrinsic X-ray luminosity $L_{i}$ (1.2--2.0 keV)= $(1.4\pm0.2)\times10^{33}$ erg/s. The energy distribution of the source indicates that this object is an isolated neutron star: a Central Compact Object akin to those present in the Cas A and Puppis A supernova remnants, and the first of its kind to be identified outside of our Galaxy.
The detection of the diffuse supernova neutrino background (DSNB) will preciously contribute to gauge the properties of the core-collapse supernova population. We estimate the DSNB event rate in the next-generation neutrino detectors, Hyper-Kamiokande enriched with Gadolinium, JUNO, and DUNE. The determination of the supernova unknowns through the DSNB will be heavily driven by Hyper-Kamiokande, given its higher expected event rate, and complemented by DUNE that will help in reducing the parameters uncertainties. Meanwhile, JUNO will be sensitive to the DSNB signal over the largest energy range. A joint statistical analysis of the expected rates in 20 years of data taking from the above detectors suggests that we will be sensitive to the local supernova rate at most at a 20-33% level. A non-zero fraction of supernovae forming black holes will be confirmed at a 90% CL, if the true value of that fraction is larger than 20%. On the other hand, the DSNB events show extremely poor statistical sensitivity to the nuclear equation of state and mass accretion rate of the progenitors forming black holes.
The energy liberated by fallback accretion has been suggested as a possible engine to power hydrogen-poor superluminous supernovae. We systematically investigate this model using the Bayesian light-curve fitting code MOSFiT (Modular Open Source Fitter for Transients), fitting the light curves of 37 hydrogen-poor superluminous supernovae assuming a fallback accretion central engine. We find that this model can yield good fits to their light curves, with a fit quality that rivals the popular magnetar engine models. Examining our derived parameters for the fallback model, we find the total energy requirements from the accretion disk are estimated to be 0.002 - 0.7 Msun c^2. If we adopt a typical conversion efficiency ~ 1e-3, the required mass to accrete is thus 2 - 700 Msun. Many superluminous supernovae, therefore, require an unrealistic accretion mass, and so only a fraction of these events could be powered by fallback accretion unless the true efficiency is much greater than our fiducial value. The superluminous supernovae that require the smallest amounts of fallback mass still remain to be the fallback accretion powered supernova candidates, but they are difficult to be distinguished solely by their light curve properties.
We draw attention to recent high explosive (HE) experiments which provide compression of macroscopic amount of matter to high, even record, values of pressure in comparison with other HE experiments. The observed bounce after the compression corresponds to processes in core-collapse supernova explosions after neutrino trapping. Conditions provided in the experiments resemble those in core-collapse supernovae, permitting their use for laboratory astrophysics. A unique feature of the experiments is compression at low entropy. The values of specific entropy are close to those obtained in numerical simulations during the process of collapse in supernova explosions, and much lower than those obtained at laser ignition facilities, another type of high-compression experiment. Both in supernovae and HE experiments the bounce occurs at low entropy, so the HE experiments provide a new platform to realize some supernova collapse effects in laboratory, especially to study hydrodynamics of collapsing flows and the bounce. Due to the good resolution of diagnostics in the compression of macroscopic amounts of material with essential effects of nonideal plasma in EOS, and observed development of 3D instabilities, these experiments may serve as a useful benchmark for astrophysical hydrodynamic codes.
Neutrinos emitted from a supernova may undergo flavor conversions almost immediately above the core, with possible consequences for supernova dynamics and nucleosynthesis. However, the precise conditions for such fast conversions can be difficult to compute and require knowledge of the full angular distribution of the flavor-dependent neutrino fluxes, that is not available in typical supernova simulations. In this paper, we show that the overall flavor evolution is qualitatively similar to the growth of a so-called `zero mode', determined by the background matter and neutrino densities, which can be reliably predicted using only the second angular moments of the electron lepton number distribution, i.e., the difference in the angular distributions of $\nu_e$ and $\bar{\nu}_e$ fluxes. We propose that this zero mode, which neither requires computing the full Green's function nor a detailed knowledge of the angular distributions, may be useful for a preliminary diagnosis of possible fast flavor conversions in supernova simulations with modestly resolved angular distributions
The observed sub-class of "superluminous" Type Ia supernovae lacks a convincing theoretical explanation. If the emission of such objects were powered exclusively by radioactive decay of 56Ni formed in the explosion, a progenitor mass close to or even above the Chandrasekhar limit for a non-rotating white dwarf star would be required. Masses significantly exceeding this limit can be supported by differential rotation. We, therefore, explore explosions and predict observables for various scenarios resulting from differentially rotating carbon-oxygen white dwarfs close to their respective limit of stability. Specifically, we have investigated a prompt detonation model, detonations following an initial deflagration phase ("delayed detonation" models), and a pure deflagration model. In postprocessing steps, we performed nucleosynthesis and three-dimensional radiative transfer calculations, that allow us, for the first time, to consistently derive synthetic observables from our models. We find that all explosion scenarios involving detonations produce very bright events. The observables predicted for them, however, are inconsistent with any known subclass of Type Ia supernovae. Pure deflagrations resemble 2002cx-like supernovae and may contribute to this class. We discuss implications of our findings for the explosion mechanism and for the existence of differentially rotating white dwarfs as supernova progenitors.
Although type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) are so important in many astrophysical fields, a debate on their progenitor model is still endless. Searching the surviving companion in a supernova remnant (SNR) may distinguish different progenitor models, since a companion still exists in the remnant for the single-degenerate (SD) model, but does not for the double degenerate (DD) model. However, some recent surveys do not discover the surviving companions in the remnant of SN 1006 and Kepler's supernova, which seems to disfavor the SD model. Such a result could be derived from an incorrect survey target. Here, based on the common-envelope wind SD model for SNe Ia, in which the initial binary system consists of a white dwarf (WD) and a main-sequence (MS) star, we found that the companion at the moment of supernova explosion may be a MS, red-giant (RG) or subdwarf B (sdB) star if a spin-down timescale of less than $10^{\rm 7}$ yr is assumed. We show the properties of the companions at the moment of supernova explosion, which are key clues to search the surviving companions in SNRs. Here, we suggest that the sdB star may be the surviving companion in some SNRs, even if the progenitor systems are the WD + MS systems. The SNe Ia with the sdB companions may contribute to all SNe Ia as much as 22\%.
The next generation of gravitational wave detectors will improve the detection prospects for gravitational waves from core-collapse supernovae. The complex astrophysics involved in core-collapse supernovae pose a significant challenge to modeling such phenomena. The Supernova Model Evidence Extractor (SMEE) attempts to capture the main features of gravitational wave signals from core-collapse supernovae by using numerical relativity waveforms to create approximate models. These models can then be used to perform Bayesian model selection to determine if the targeted astrophysical feature is present in the gravitational wave signal. In this paper, we extend SMEE's model selection capabilities to include features in the gravitational wave signal that are associated with g-modes and the standing accretion shock instability. For the first time, we test SMEE's performance using simulated data for planned future detectors, such as the Einstein Telescope, Cosmic Explorer, and LIGO Voyager. Further to this, we show how the performance of SMEE is improved by creating models from the spectrograms of supernova waveforms instead of their timeseries waveforms that contain stochastic features. In third generation detector configurations, we find that about 50% of neutrino-driven simulations were detectable at 100 kpc, and 10% at 275 kpc. The explosion mechanism was correctly determined for all detected signals.
Interactions between massive stars in binaries are thought to be responsible for much of the observed diversity of supernovae. As surveys probe rarer populations of events, we should expect to see supernovae arising from increasingly uncommon progenitor channels. Here we examine a scenario in which massive stars merge after they have both formed a hydrogen-exhausted core. We suggest this could produce stars which explode as pair-instability supernovae (PISNe) with significantly more hydrogen, at a given metallicity, than in single-star models with the same pre-explosion oxygen-rich core mass. We investigate the subset of those stellar mergers which later produce pulsational PISNe, and estimate that the rate of such post-merger, hydrogen-rich pulsational PISNe could approach a few in a thousand of all core-collapse supernovae. The nature and predicted rate of such hydrogen-rich pulsational PISNe are reminiscent of the very unusual supernova iPTF14hls. For plausible assumptions, PISNe from similar mergers might dominate the rate of PISNe in the local Universe.
SN1991bg-like supernovae are a distinct subclass of thermonuclear supernovae (SNe Ia). Their spectral and photometric peculiarities indicate their progenitors and explosion mechanism differ from `normal' SNe Ia. One method of determining information about supernova progenitors we cannot directly observe is to observe the stellar population adjacent to the apparent supernova explosion site to infer the distribution of stellar population ages and metallicities. We obtain integral field observations and analyse the spectra extracted from regions of projected radius $\sim\,\mathrm{kpc}$ about the apparent SN explosion site for 11 91bg-like SNe in both early- and late-type galaxies. We utilize full-spectrum spectral fitting to determine the ages and metallicities of the stellar population within the aperture. We find that the majority of the stellar populations that hosted 91bg-like supernovae have little recent star formation. The ages of the stellar populations suggest that that 91bg-like SN progenitors explode after delay times of $>6\,\mathrm{Gyr}$, much longer than the typical delay time of normal SNe Ia, which peaks at $\sim 1\,\mathrm{Gyr}$.
It was recently demonstrated that asymmetric dark matter can ignite supernovae by collecting and collapsing inside lone sub-Chandrasekhar mass white dwarfs, and that this may be the cause of Type Ia supernovae. A ball of asymmetric dark matter accumulated inside a white dwarf and collapsing under its own weight, sheds enough gravitational potential energy through scattering with nuclei, to spark the fusion reactions that precede a Type Ia supernova explosion. In this article we elaborate on this mechanism and use it to place new bounds on interactions between nucleons and asymmetric dark matter for masses $m_{X} = 10^{6}-10^{16}$ GeV. Interestingly, we find that for dark matter more massive than $10^{11}$ GeV, Type Ia supernova ignition can proceed through the Hawking evaporation of a small black hole formed by the collapsed dark matter. We also identify how a cold white dwarf's Coulomb crystal structure substantially suppresses dark matter-nuclear scattering at low momentum transfers, which is crucial for calculating the time it takes dark matter to form a black hole. Higgs and vector portal dark matter models that ignite Type Ia supernovae are explored.
Paleo-detectors are a proposed experimental technique in which one would search for traces of recoiling nuclei in ancient minerals. Natural minerals on Earth are as old as $\mathcal{O}(1)$ Gyr and, in many minerals, the damage tracks left by recoiling nuclei are also preserved for time scales long compared to $1\,$Gyr once created. Thus, even reading out relatively small target samples of order $100\,$g, paleo-detectors would allow one to search for very rare events thanks to the large exposure, $\varepsilon \sim 100\;{\rm g\;Gyr} = 10^5\;{\rm t\;yr}$. Here, we explore the potential of paleo-detectors to measure nuclear recoils induced by neutrinos from galactic core collapse supernovae. We find that they would not only allow for a direct measurement of the average core collapse supernova rate in the Milky Way, but would also contain information about the time-dependence of the local supernova rate over the past $\sim 1$ Gyr. Since the supernova rate is thought to be directly proportional to the star formation rate, such a measurement would provide a determination of the local star formation history. We investigate the sensitivity of paleo-detectors to both a smooth time evolution and an enhancement of the core collapse supernova rate on relatively short time scales, as would be expected for a starburst period in the local group.
The design and analysis of time-domain sky surveys requires the ability to simulate accurately realistic populations of core collapse supernova (SN) events. We present a set of spectral time-series templates designed for this purpose, for both hydrogen-rich (type II, IIn, IIb) and stripped envelope (types Ib, Ic, Ic-BL) core collapse supernovae. We use photometric and spectroscopic data for 67 core collapse supernovae from the literature, and for each generate a time-series spectral template. The techniques used to build the templates are fully data-driven with no assumption of any parametric form or model for the light curves. The template-building code is open-source, and can be applied to any transient for which well-sampled multi-band photometry and multiple spectroscopic observations are available. We extend these spectral templates into the near-ultraviolet to $\lambda \lambda \sim 1600 \AA$ using observer-frame ultraviolet photometry. We also provide a set of templates corrected for host galaxy dust extinction, and provide a set of luminosity functions that can be used with our spectral templates in simulations. We give an example of how these templates can be used by integrating them within the popular SN simulation package $\textsc{snana}$, and simulating core collapse supernovae in photometrically-selected cosmological type Ia supernova samples, prone to contamination from core collapse events.
The mixing of active neutrinos with their sterile counterparts with keV mass is known to have a potentially major impact on the energy loss from the supernova core. By relying on a set of three static hydrodynamical backgrounds mimicking the early accretion phase and the Kelvin-Helmoltz cooling phase of a supernova, we develop the first self-consistent, radial- and time-dependent treatment of sterile and tau neutrinos mixing in the dense stellar core. We follow the flavor evolution by including ordinary matter effects, collisional production of sterile neutrinos, as well as reconversions of sterile states into active ones. The dynamical feedback of the sterile neutrino production on the matter background leads to the development of a tau lepton asymmetry that grows in time until it reaches a value larger than 0.15. Our results hint towards significant implications for the supernova physics, and call for a self-consistent modeling of the sterile neutrino transport in the supernova core to constrain the mixing parameters of sterile neutrinos.
The detection of $\sim 1.5-3.2$ Myr old $^{60}$Fe on Earth indicates recent nearby core-collapse supernovae. For supernovae in multiple stars, the primary stars may become neutron stars, while former companions may become unbound and become runaway stars. We wrote software for tracing back the space motion of runaway and neutron stars to young associations of massive stars. We apply it here to the nearby young Scorpius-Centaurus-Lupus groups, all known runaway stars possibly coming from there, and all 400 neutron stars with known transverse velocity. We find kinematic evidence that the runaway $\zeta$ Oph and the radio pulsar PSRB1706-16 were released by a supernova in a binary $1.78 \pm 0.21$ Myr ago at $107 \pm 4$ pc distance (for pulsar radial velocity $260 \pm 43$ km/s); association age and flight time determine the progenitor mass (16-18 M$_{\odot}$), which can constrain supernova nucleosynthesis yields and $^{60}$Fe uptake on Earth. In addition, we notice that the only high-mass X-ray binary in Scorpius-Centaurus-Lupus (1H11255-567 with $\mu^{1}$ and $\mu^{2}$ Cru) may include a neutron star formed in another SN, up to $\sim 1.8$ Myr ago at $89-112$ pc, i.e. also yielding $^{60}$Fe detectable on Earth. Our scenario links $^{60}$Fe found on Earth to one or two individual supernovae in multiple stars.
With the advent of modern neutrino and gravitational wave detectors, the promise of multi-messenger detections of the next galactic core-collapse supernova has become very real. Such detections will give insight into the core-collapse supernova mechanism, the structure of the progenitor star, and may resolve longstanding questions in fundamental physics. In order to properly interpret these detections, a thorough understanding of the landscape of possible core-collapse supernova events, and their multi-messenger signals, is needed. We present detailed predictions of neutrino and gravitational wave signals from 1D simulations of stellar core collapse, spanning the landscape of core-collapse progenitors from $9-120\,\mathrm{M}_{\odot}$. In order to achieve explosions in 1D, we use the STIR model, which includes the effects of turbulence and convection in 1D supernova simulations to mimic the 3D explosion mechanism. We study the gravitational wave emission from the 1D simulations using an astroseismology analysis of the proto-neutron star. We find that the neutrino and gravitational wave signals are strongly correlated with the structure of the progenitor star and remnant compact object. Using these correlations, future detections of the first few seconds of neutrino and gravitational wave emission from a galactic core-collapse supernova may be able to provide constraints on stellar evolution independent of pre-explosion imaging and the mass of the compact object remnant prior to fallback accretion.
We compute an extensive set of early-time spectra of supernovae interacting with circumstellar material using the radiative transfer code CMFGEN. Our models are applicable to events observed from 1 to a few days after explosion. Using these models, we constrain the progenitor and explosion properties of a sample of 17 observed interacting supernovae at early-times. Because massive stars have strong mass loss, these spectra provide valuable information about supernova progenitors, such as mass-loss rates, wind velocities, and surface abundances. We show that these events span a wide range of explosion and progenitor properties, exhibiting supernova luminosities in the 1e8 to 1e12 Lsun range, temperatures from 10000 to 60000 K, progenitor mass-loss rates from a few 1e-4 up to 1 Msun/yr, wind velocities from 100 to 800 km/s, and surface abundances from solar-like to H-depleted. Our results suggest that many progenitors of supernovae interacting with circumstellar material have significantly increased mass-loss before explosion compared to what massive stars show during the rest of their lifetimes. We also infer a lack of correlation between surface abundances and mass-loss rates. This may point to the pre-explosion mass-loss mechanism being independent of stellar mass. We find that the majority of these events have CNO-processed surface abundances. In the single star scenario this points to a preference towards high-mass RSGs as progenitors of interacting SNe, while binary evolution could impact this conclusion. Our models are publicly available and readily applicable to analyze results from ongoing and future large scale surveys such as the Zwicky Transient Factory.
We report the detection of SN1988Z in X-rays with the ROSAT High Resolution Imager. The inferred X-ray luminosity of about $10^{41}\ergps$ can be well explained by assuming that the supernova occurred in a dense circumstellar medium, consistent with optical observations. SN1988Z is the most distant supernova yet detected in X-rays.
A review of type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) statistics as expected from the different scenarios and explosion models so far suggested is presented.
There has been a new infusion of ideas in the study of the mechanism and early character of core--collapse supernovae. However, despite recent conceptual and computational progress, fundamental questions remain. Some are summarize herein.
We study the equation of state of quark matter at finite temperature, using a confinement model in which chiral symmetry remains broken in the deconfined phase. Implications for type II supernova explosion and for the structure and evolution of the proto-neutron star are discussed.
We summarize the current observational evidence for associations between supernova remnants and neutron stars, including radio pulsars, proposed "inactive" young neutron stars, "anomalous" X-ray pulsars, and soft gamma-ray repeaters, and argue that the paradigm that all young neutron stars are Crab-like requires reconsideration.
The particle acceleration process at a shock wave, in the presence of the second-order Fermi acceleration in the turbulent medium near the shock, is discussed as an alternative explanation for the observed flat synchrotron spectra of supernova remnants (SNRs) in molecular clouds. We argue that medium Alfv\'en Mach number shocks considered by Chevalier (1999, ApJ, in press) for such SNRs can naturally lead to the observed spectral indices.
In this paper we discuss possible ultra high energy ($\ge$ TeV) neutrino emission from Supernova Remnants (SNRs), specifically the hadronic gamma ray production models. Recent very high energy (VHE) $\gamma$ ray observation from SNRs is the main motivation behind this study.
A model for Galactic chemical evolution, driven by supernova-induced star formation, is formulated and used to examine the nature of the Galactic halo at early epochs. In this model, new stars are formed following each supernova event, thus their abundance pattern is determined by the combination of heavy elements ejected from the supernova itself and those elements which are already present in the interstellar gas swept up by the supernova remnant. The end result is a prediction of large scatter in the abundance ratios among low-metallicity stars, reflecting a different nucleosynthesis yield for each Type II supernova with a different progenitor mass. Formation of new stars is terminated when supernova remnants sweep up too little gas to form shells. We show from calculations based on the above scenario that (i) the observed [Fe/H] distribution for the Galactic halo field stars can be reproduced without effectively decreasing the heavy-element yields from Type II supernovae by some manipulation required by previous models (e.g., via mass loss from the early Galaxy, or later mixing with ``pristine'' hydrogen clouds), (ii) the large observed scatter in the abundance ratio [Eu/Fe] for the most metal-poor stars can also be reproduced, and (iii) the frequency distribution of stars in the [Eu/Fe]-[Fe/H] plane can be predicted. Our model suggests that the probability of identifying essentially metal-free stars (Population III) in the local halo is around one in 10^{3-4}, provided that star formation in the halo is confined to individual gas clouds with mass of 10^{6-7} Msun and that the initial mass function of metal-free stars is not significantly different from the Salpeter mass function.
We present optical and near-infrared photometry and spectroscopy of the type Ia SN 1998bu in the Leo I Group galaxy M96 (NGC 3368). The data set consists of 356 photometric measurements and 29 spectra of SN 1998bu between UT 1998 May 11 and July 15. The well-sampled light curve indicates the supernova reached maximum light in B on UT 1998 May 19.3 (JD 2450952.8 +/- 0.8) with B = 12.22 +/- 0.03 and V = 11.88 +/- 0.02. Application of a revised version of the Multicolor Light Curve Shape (MLCS) method yields an extinction toward the supernova of A_V = 0.94 +/- 0.15 mag, and indicates the supernova was of average luminosity compared to other normal type Ia supernovae. Using the HST Cepheid distance modulus to M96 (Tanvir et al. 1995) and the MLCS fit parameters for the supernova, we derive an extinction-corrected absolute magnitude for SN 1998bu at maximum, M_V = -19.42 +/- 0.22. Our independent results for this supernova are consistent with those of Suntzeff et al. (1999). Combining SN 1998bu with three other well-observed local calibrators and 42 supernovae in the Hubble flow yields a Hubble constant, H_0 = 64^{+8}_{-6} km/s/Mpc, where the error estimate incorporates possible sources of systematic uncertainty including the calibration of the Cepheid period-luminosity relation, the metallicity dependence of the Cepheid distance scale, and the distance to the LMC.
We investigate to which extent a time variation of the gravitational constant or other fundamental constants affects the best fit of the Hubble diagram of type Ia supernovae. In particular, we show that a slow increase of $G$ in the past, below experimental constraints, can reconcile the SNe Ia observations with an open zero-$\Lambda$ universe.
It is predicted that H$\alpha$ emission line at the early nebular epoch of type II-P supernovae may display robust observational effects of damping wings. This is illustrated by Monte-Carlo simulations. The strength of damping wing effects may be used to constrain parameters of the line-emitting zone. An anomalous redshift, width and red wing of H$\alpha$ revealed by SN 1997D on day 150 are explained in terms of damping wing effects.
I briefly summarize some facts and ideas concerning the presence of neutron stars in Supernova remnants. While sources similar to the Crab Nebula require the presence of a central energetic object, shell-type remnants such as Cas A are compatible with the presence of neutron stars releasing a weak relativistic wind.
The evidence for associations between neutron stars and supernova remnants is reviewed. After summarizing the situation for young radio pulsars, I consider the evidence from associations that young neutron stars can have properties very different from those of radio pulsars. This, though still controversial, shakes our simple perception of the Crab pulsar as prototypical of the young neutron star population.
We present a high-resolution 5-GHz radio continuum map of the starburst galaxy NGC 2146 made with MERLIN and the VLA, in a search of radio supernovae and supernova remnants expected to be already produced by the most massive stars in the starburst. At 5 GHz, about 20 point sources were detected earlier by Glendenning & Kronberg (1986) in the central 800 pc of NGC 2146. Our observations with higher sensitivity and resolution made with MERLIN and the VLA confirms the detection of 18 sources, and resolves 7 of them. Additional 1.6-GHz MERLIN observations disclose 9 sources coincident in position with those detected at 5 GHz, which allows us to derive their spectral indices. Only 3 sources have indices consistent with synchrotron emission from supernova remnants or radio supernovae, while the others have very steep inverted spectra. We suggest that the sources with positive spectral index are optically thick ultra-compact and/or ultra-dense HII regions with high electron densities and high emission measures (EM > 10^(7) cm^(-6) pc). Minimum energy requirements indicate that these regions may contain up to 1000 equivalent stars of type O6. When compared with M 82, the galaxy NGC 2146 lacks however a large number of supernova remnants. We suggest that NGC 2146 is experiencing a burst of star formation stronger than that in M 82, but being in a younger phase. We may, however, not exclude an alternative scenario in which strong free-free absorption at 1.6 GHz in foreground ionized gas with very high emission measures (EM > 10^(8) cm^(-6) pc) hides a certain number of supernova remnants, thus rendering for some sources the observed inverted spectra.
The performance of the three X-ray telescopes on-board of XMM-Newton is evaluated addressing imaging characteristics and effective collecting area. The agreement with ground calibration data is excellent. The analysis of images and spectra of cosmic X-ray sources, emphazising supernova and supernova remnants, prooves that the telescopes are even better than originally required.
It is shown that the cosmological relativity theory prdicts the value Lambda = 1.934 x 10^-35 s^-2 for the cosmological constant. This value of Lambda is in exellent agreement with the measurements recently obtained by the High-Z Supernova Team and the Supernova Cosmology Project.
In order to assist in planing the search of supernova (SN) in the late time afterglow (AG) of the gamma ray burst (GRB) 011121 we use the Cannonball Model of GRBs and the observations of its afterglow in the R band in the first two days to predict its late time decline and intrinsic spectrum.
Type Ia supernovae have become an indispensable tool for studying the expansion history of the universe, yet our understanding of the explosion mechanism is still incomplete. We describe the variety of discussed scenarios, sketch the most relevant physics, and report recent advances in multidimensional simulations of Chandrasekhar mass white dwarf explosions.
Recent observations of high redshift Supernovae at lower than expected value of the Hubble constant, widely interpreted as an evidence for accelerating expansion of the Universe, could alternatively be explained assuming a hyperbolic Universe with a negative spatial curvature of the order of k = - 1/(2100 Mpc).
We report on follow-up observations of double degenerate (DD) white dwarfs from the Supernovae Ia Progenitor Survey (SPY). Orbital parameters of four systems, including a massive short period system, are presented.
We show that in the units of the relative Paris meter both the latest data on the Supernova luminosity-distance -- redshift relation and primordial nucleosynthesis are described by the dynamics of a homogeneous, massless scalar field (Scalar Quintessence) in a nonexpanding universe.
Here we present semi-analytical solutions of the hydrodynamics of compact supernova remnants (cSNRs) and their chemical evolution. Two models of $15 M_{\odot}$ and $25 M_{\odot}$ supernova explosions evolving in a high density medium ($n_0 \sim 10^7 cm^{-3}$) are throughly discussed.
We study the dependence of the peak luminosity of Type Ia supernovae on the fine structure constant $\alpha$. We find that decreasing (increasing) $\alpha$ enhances (reduces) the luminosity. Future experiments like SNAP could determine the variation of $\alpha$ to a precision of $10^{-2}$.
In this brief review we explore the role of neutrino-nucleus interactions in core-collapse supernovae and discuss open questions. In addition implications of neutrino mass and mixings in such environments are summarized.
Most cosmic rays are thought to be accelerated by the shocks of supernova explosions of very massive stars. Here we review one quantitative proposal, which predicted the spectral slopes, bend and cutoff about the cosmic ray spectrum across the spectral bend or "knee" near 3x10^15 eV in 1993. Many of the specific predictions have now been verified, and so it may be appropiate to investigate the consequences of that proposal. The successful fit to the cosmic ray data across the knee suggests: 1) very massive stars, above about 20 to 25 solar masses all converge to a common final state; 2) the supernova explosion of these very massive stars is caused by a combination of rotation, magnetic fields and the gravitational potential, just as proposed by G. Bisnovatyi-Kogan in 1970, based on an earlier suggestion by N.S. Kardashev in 1964; 3) their stellar winds as well as the explosion provide the main injection of magnetic fields into the interstellar medium; 4) the explosive energy of these supernovae is about 10^52 erg; 5) the explosion is extremely anisotropic, which may unify several classes of observed supernova types; 6) gamma ray bursts may be the ultimate version of such an explosion in the case the collapse leads to a black hole; 7)it is plausible that the luminosity of the supernova integrated over all aspect angles is also the same for all these massive star explosions, leading to 8) a possibly very bright standard candle, if we could just find a correction for the extreme asphericity. This may solve the problem of what the mechanism of supernova explosions is for very massive stars, where most cosmic rays and magnetic fields come from, and may also point the way to a unifying scheme for supernova explosions and gamma ray bursts.
Recent observations have extended the range of diversity among spectra of Type Ia supernovae. I briefly discuss SN Ia explosion models in the spectroscopic context, the observed diversity, and some recent results from direct analysis with the Synow code for one normal and two peculiar SNe Ia. Relating the observational manifestations of diversity to their physical causes is looking like an ever more challenging problem.
We briefly summarize the survey of HI 21 cm emission lines to search for shocked atomic gas associated with Galactic supernova remnants (SNRs) in the southern sky. For G347.3-0.5, we discuss the distance to the SNR and the implications of the HI results.
We investigate the flux and event rate of supernova relic neutrinos (SRNs) and discuss their implications for the cosmic star formation rate. As reference models, we adopt the supernova rate model based on recent observations and the supernova neutrino spectrum numerically calculated by several groups. In the detection energy range E_e>10 MeV, which will possibly be a background-free region in the near future, the SRN event rate is found to be 1-2 yr^{-1} at a water Cerenkov detector with a fiducial volume of 22.5 kton, depending on the adopted neutrino spectrum. We also simulate the expected signal with one set of the reference models by using the Monte Carlo method and then analyze these pseudodata with several free parameters, obtaining the distribution of the best-fit values for them. In particular, we use a parameterization such that R_{SN}(z)=R_{SN}^0 (1+z)^\alpha, where R_{SN}(z) is the comoving supernova rate density at redshift z and R_{SN}^0 and \alpha are free parameters, assuming that the supernova neutrino spectrum and luminosity are well understood by way of a future Galactic supernova neutrino burst or the future development of numerical supernova simulations. The obtained 1\sigma errors for these two parameters are found to be \delta\alpha /\alpha = 30% (7.8%) and \delta R_{SN}^0/ R_{SN}^0 = 28% (7.7%) for a detector with an effective volume of 22.5 kton 5 yr (440 kton 5 yr), where one of the parameters is fixed. On the other hand, if we fix neither of the values for these two parameters, the expected errors become rather large, \delta\alpha /\alpha = 37% and \delta R_{SN}^0/ R_{SN}^0 = 55%, even with an effective volume of 440 kton 5 yr.
We present optical and/or infrared photometry of the Type Ia supernovae SN 1991T, SN 1991bg, SN 1999ek, SN 2001bt, SN 2001cn, SN 2001cz, and SN 2002bo. All but one of these supernovae have decline rate parameters Delta m_15(B) close to the median value of 1.1 for the whole class of Type Ia supernovae. The addition of these supernovae to the relationship between the near-infrared absolute magnitudes and Delta m_15(B) strengthens the previous relationships we have found, in that the maximum light absolute magnitudes are essentially independent of the decline rate parameter. (SN 1991bg, the prototype of the subclass of fast declining Type Ia supernovae, is a special case.) The dispersion in the Hubble diagram in JHK is only ~0.15 mag. The near-infrared properties of Type Ia supernovae continue to be excellent measures of the luminosity distances to the supernova host galaxies, due to the need for only small corrections from the epoch of observation to maximum light, low dispersion in absolute magnitudes at maximum light, and the minimal reddening effects in the near-infrared.
I discuss young close-by compact objects, recent supernovae in the solar neighbourhood, and point to their connection with cosmic ray studies. Especially the role of the Gould Belt is underlined.
We discuss the mass ranges over which we find AGB and super-AGB stars. The most massive super-AGB stars are candidate progenitors for type II core-collapse SNe. We discuss the two supernovae, SN1980K and SN2003gd that provide some restrictions on the upper mass limit of super-AGB stars.
We present VLT FORS1 and FORS2 spectra of 39 candidate high-redshift supernovae that were discovered as part of a cosmological study using Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) over a wide range of redshifts. From the spectra alone, 20 candidates are spectrally classified as SNe Ia with redshifts ranging from z=0.212 to z=1.181. Of the remaining 19 candidates, 1 might be a Type II supernova and 11 exhibit broad supernova-like spectral features and/or have supernova-like light curves. The candidates were discovered in 8 separate ground-based searches. In those searches in which SNe Ia at z ~ 0.5 were targeted, over 80% of the observed candidates were spectrally classified as SNe Ia. In those searches in which SNe Ia with z > 1 were targeted, 4 candidates with z > 1 were spectrally classified as SNe Ia and later followed with ground and space based observatories. We present the spectra of all candidates, including those that could not be spectrally classified as supernova.
In general, Light Echoes (LE) are beautiful, rather academical and therefore unavoidably useless phenomena. In some cases, however, they can give interesting information about the environment surrounding the exploding star. After giving a brief introduction to the subject, I describe its application to the case of Type Ia Supernovae and discuss the implications for progenitors and their location within the host galaxies.
For true insight into the nature of dark energy, measurements of the precision and accuracy of the Supernova/Acceleration Probe (SNAP) are required. Precursor or scaled-down experiments are unavoidably limited, even for distinguishing the cosmological constant. This white paper presents an overview of the necessity for SNAP and the role of precursor experiments; accompanying white papers detail the supernovae and weak lensing parts of the experiment.
The hypothesis that the speed of light decreases by nearly 2 cm per sec and per year is discussed within the frame of a simple phenomenological model. It is shown that this hypothesis can provide an alternative explanation for the redshift-distance relationship of type Ia supernovae, which is nowadays given in terms of a new form of (dark) energy of unknown origin.
CCD UBVRI photometry is presented for type Ia supernova 2004fu in NGC 6949. The light and colour curves are typical for this class of objects, absolute magnitude at maximum and decline rate are in agreement with the relationship between these parameters, established for SNe Ia.
We construct a simple model for radioisotopic enrichment of the protosolar nebula by injection from a nearby supernova, based on the inverse square law for ejecta dispersion. We find that the presolar radioisotopes abundances (i.e., in solar masses) demand a nearby supernova: its distance can be no larger than 66 times the size of the protosolar nebula, at a 90% confidence level, assuming 1 solar mass of protosolar material. The relevant size of the nebula depends on its state of evolution at the time of radioactivity injection. In one scenario, a collection of low-mass stars, including our sun, formed in a group or cluster with an intermediate- to high-mass star that ended its life as a supernova while our sun was still a protostar, a starless core, or perhaps a diffuse cloud. Using recent observations of protostars to estimate the size of the protosolar nebula constrains the distance of the supernova at 0.02 to 1.6 pc. The supernova distance limit is consistent with the scales of low-mass stars formation around one or more massive stars, but it is closer than expected were the sun formed in an isolated, solitary state. Consequently, if any presolar radioactivities originated via supernova injection, we must conclude that our sun was a member of such a group or cluster that has since dispersed, and thus that solar system formation should be understood in this context. In addition, we show that the timescale from explosion to the creation of small bodies was on the order of 1.8 Myr (formal 90% confidence range of 0 to 2.2 Myr), and thus the temporal choreography from supernova ejecta to meteorites is important. Finally, we can not distinguish between progenitor masses from 15 to 25 solar masses in the nucleosynthesis models; however, the 20 solar mass model is somewhat preferred.
We review the astrophysical modeling of type Ia supernova explosions and describe numerical methods to implement numerical simulations of these events. Some results of such simulations are discussed.
We present constraints on the dark energy equation-of-state parameter, w=P/(rho c^2), using 60 Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) from the ESSENCE supernova survey. We derive a set of constraints on the nature of the dark energy assuming a flat Universe. By including constraints on (Omega_M, w) from baryon acoustic oscillations, we obtain a value for a static equation-of-state parameter w=-1.05^{+0.13}_{-0.12} (stat; 1 sigma) +- 0.11 (sys) and Omega_M=0.274^{+0.033}_{-0.020} (stat; 1 sigma) with a best-fit chi^2/DoF of 0.96. These results are consistent with those reported by the SuperNova Legacy Survey in a similar program measuring supernova distances and redshifts. We evaluate sources of systematic error that afflict supernova observations and present Monte Carlo simulations that explore these effects. Currently, the largest systematic currently with the potential to affect our measurements is the treatment of extinction due to dust in the supernova host galaxies. Combining our set of ESSENCE SNe Ia with the SuperNova Legacy Survey SNe Ia, we obtain a joint constraint of w=-1.07^{+0.09}_{-0.09} (stat; 1 sigma) +- 0.12 (sys), Omega_M=0.267^{+0.028}_{-0.018} (stat; 1 sigma) with a best-fit chi^2/DoF of 0.91. The current SN Ia data are fully consistent with a cosmological constant.
While an understanding of supernova explosions will require sophisticated large-scale simulations, it is nevertheless possible to outline the most basic features of the neutrino emission resulting from stellar core collapse with a pedestrian account that, through reliance upon broadly accessible physical ideas, remains simple and largely self-contained.
I review the use of type-Ia supernovae (SNe) for cosmological studies. After briefly recalling the main features of type-Ia SNe that lead to their use as cosmological probes, I briefly describe current and planned type-Ia SNe surveys, with special emphasis on their physics reach in the presence of systematic uncertainties, which will be dominant in nearly all cases.
We discuss some possible influence of neutrino oscillations on physics of supernova mainly focusing on the observations of $\bar{\nu}_e$, and present some analysis of SN1987A data in the light of three neutrino mixing scheme.
Core-collapse supernovae (SNe) are powerful neutrino sources and as such important targets for the growing array of neutrino observatories. We review the current status of SN theory and the expected characteristics of the neutrino signal. After recalling what we have learned from SN 1987A and general SN properties we review the physics potential of a future galactic SN observation.
The observation of the neutrinos arrived from Supernova LMC-'87A shows, with a good confidence level, the existence of two massive neutrinos. For the unobserved third neutrino mass, could speculate two possibilities either that this mass is close to one of the two observed values or that this kind of neutrino has a negligible electronic flavor component.
The high degeneracy of KK modes in models which have bulk axions moving in some extra, compact dimensions which are larger than O (Angstrom)strongly tightens the supernova upper bounds on the axion photon coupling making axions practically unobservable. Conversely, discovering axions directly or indirectly will exclude such models. These drastic conclusions are avoided if the supernova and bounds from solar axion searches are relaxed.
By using Laplace transformation we developed an approximate solution to describe neutrino oscillation probabilities in arbitrary density matter. We show that this approximation solution is valid when matter potential V satisfy $V< \Delta m^2/2E$ and $\int VL<1$, where $L$ is the length of the neutrino oscillation . Thus, the formula is useful for propagation of the solar or supernova neutrinos with terrestrial matter effect.
Supernova 1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud provides a spectacularly detailed view of the aftermath of a core-collapse explosion. The supernova ejecta initially coasted outward at more than 10% of the speed of light, but in 1990 were observed to decelerate rapidly as they began to encounter dense circumstellar material expelled by the progenitor star. The resulting shock has subsequently produced steadily brightening radio synchrotron emission, which is resolved by the Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) into an expanding limb-brightened shell. Here we present 15 years of ATCA imaging of Supernova 1987A, at an effective angular resolution of 0.4 arcsec. We find that the radio remnant has accelerated in its expansion over this period, from approx 3600 km/s in 1992 to approx 5200 km/s at the end of 2006. The published diameters of the evolving X-ray shell have been ~15% smaller than the corresponding radio values, but a simultaneous Fourier analysis of both radio and X-ray data eliminates this discrepancy, and yields a current diameter for the shell in both wave-bands of approx 1.7 arcsec. An asymmetric brightness distribution is seen in radio images at all ATCA epochs: the eastern and western rims have higher fluxes than the northern and southern regions, indicating that most of the radio emission comes from the equatorial plane of the system, where the progenitor star's circumstellar wind is thought to be densest. The eastern lobe is brighter than and further from the supernova site than the western lobe, suggesting an additional asymmetry in the initial distribution of supernova ejecta.
CCD VRI photometry is presented for SN 2002hh from 14 days after the outburst till day 347. SN 2002hh appears to be normal type IIP supernova regarding both luminosity and the shape of the light curve, which is similar to SN 1999gi.
Almost 50 radio SNR objects were selected from Green's catalogue for continuum and polarization observations. We present preliminary results of this observational campaign at 4.7 GHz carried out with Torun 32-metre radio telescope.
Important results achieved over the last years on supernova remnants, planetary nebulae and superbubbles are briefly reviewed in the context of X-ray observations. I intend to review the important open scientific questions in these fields, and the specific contributions that can be made by XMM-Newton.
Massive stars end their short lives in spectacular explosions, supernovae, that synthesize new elements and drive galaxy evolution. Throughout history supernovae were discovered chiefly through their delayed optical light, preventing observations in the first moments (hours to days) following the explosion. As a result, the progenitors of some supernovae and the events leading up to their violent demise remain intensely debated. Here we report the serendipitous discovery of a supernova at the time of explosion, marked by an extremely luminous X-ray outburst. We attribute the outburst to the break-out of the supernova shock-wave from the progenitor, and show that the inferred rate of such events agrees with that of all core-collapse supernovae. We forecast that future wide-field X-ray surveys will catch hundreds of supernovae each year in the act of explosion, and thereby enable crucial neutrino and gravitational wave detections that may ultimately unravel the explosion mechanism.
The WD+MS channel of the single-degenerate scenario is currently favourable for progenitors of type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). Incorporating the results of detailed binary evolution calculations for this channel into the latest version of a binary population synthesis code, I obtained the distributions of many properties of the companion stars at the moment of SN explosion. The properties can be verified by future observations.
The aim of the work presented in this paper is to test and optimise supernova detection methods based on the optimal image subtraction technique. The main focus is on applying the detection methods to wide field supernova imaging surveys and in particular to the Stockholm VIMOS Supernova Survey (SVISS). We have constructed a supernova detection pipeline for imaging surveys. The core of the pipeline is image subtraction using the ISIS 2.2 package. Using real data from the SVISS we simulate supernovae in the images, both inside and outside galaxies. The detection pipeline is then run on the simulated frames and the effects of image quality and subtraction parameters on the detection efficiency and photometric accuracy are studied. The pipeline allows efficient detection of faint supernovae in the deep imaging data. It also allows controlling and correcting for possible systematic effects in the SN detection and photometry. We find such a systematic effect in the form of a small systematic flux offset remaining at the positions of galaxies in the subtracted frames. This offset will not only affect the photometric accuracy of the survey, but also the detection efficiencies. Our study has shown that ISIS 2.2 works well for the SVISS data. We have found that the detection efficiency and photometric accuracy of the survey are affected by the stamp selection for the image subtraction and by host galaxy brightness. With our tools the subtraction results can be further optimised, any systematic effects can be controlled and photometric errors estimated, which is very important for the SVISS, as well as for future SN searches based on large imaging surveys such as Pan-STARRS and LSST.
Powerful gravitational telescopes in the form of massive galaxy clusters can be used to enhance the light collecting power over a limited field of view by about an order of magnitude in flux. This effect is exploited here to increase the depth of a survey for lensed supernovae at near-IR wavelengths. A pilot SN search program conducted with the ISAAC camera at VLT is presented. Lensed galaxies behind the massive clusters A1689, A1835 and AC114 were observed for a total of 20 hours split into 2, 3 and 4 epochs respectively, separated by approximately one month to a limiting magnitude J<24 (Vega). Image subtractions including another 20 hours worth of archival ISAAC/VLT data were used to search for transients with lightcurve properties consistent with redshifted supernovae, both in the new and reference data. The feasibility of finding lensed supernovae in our survey was investigated using synthetic lightcurves of supernovae and several models of the volumetric Type Ia and core-collapse supernova rates as a function of redshift. We also estimate the number of supernova discoveries expected from the inferred star formation rate in the observed galaxies. The methods consistently predict a Poisson mean value for the expected number of SNe in the survey between N_SN=0.8 and 1.6 for all supernova types, evenly distributed between core collapse and Type Ia SN. One transient object was found behind A1689, 0.5" from a galaxy with photometric redshift z_gal=0.6 +- 0.15. The lightcurve and colors of the transient are consistent with being a reddened Type IIP SN at z_SN=0.59. The lensing model predicts 1.4 magnitudes of magnification at the location of the transient, without which this object would not have been detected in the near-IR ground based search described in this paper (unlensed magnitude J~25). (abridged)
Feedback from massive stars is one of the least understood aspects of galaxy formation. We perform a suite of vertically stratified local interstellar medium (ISM) simulations in which supernova rates and vertical gas column densities are systematically varied based on the Schmidt-Kennicutt law. Our simulations have a sufficiently high spatial resolution (1.95 pc) to follow the hydrodynamic interactions among multiple supernovae that structure the ISM. At a given supernova rate, we find that the mean mass-weighted sound speed and velocity dispersion decrease as the inverse square root of gas density, indicating that both thermal and turbulent pressures are nearly constant in the midplane, so the effective equation of state is isobaric. In contrast, across our four models having supernova rates that range from one to 512 times the Galactic supernova rate, the mass-weighted velocity dispersion remains in the range 4-6 km/s. Hence, gas averaged over ~100 pc regions follows an effective equation of state that is close to isothermal. Simulated H I emission lines have widths of 10-18 km/s, comparable to observed values. In our highest supernova rate model, superbubble blow-outs occur, and the turbulent pressure on large scales is >~4 times higher than the thermal pressure. We find a tight correlation between the thermal and turbulent pressures averaged over ~100 pc regions in the midplane of each model, as well as across the four ISM models. We construct a subgrid model for turbulent pressure based on analytic arguments and explicitly calibrate it against our stratified ISM simulations. The subgrid model provides a simple yet physically motivated way to include supernova feedback in cosmological simulations.
We use the star formation history map of the Large Magellanic Cloud to study the sites of the eight smallest (and presumably youngest) supernova remnants in the Cloud: SN 1987A, N158A, N49, and N63A (core collapse remnants), 0509-67.5, 0519-69.0, N103B, and DEM L71 (Type Ia remnants). The local star formation histories provide unique insights into the nature of the supernova progenitors, which we compare with the properties of the supernova explosions derived from the remnants themselves and from supernova light echoes. We find that all the core collapse supernovae that we have studied are associated with vigorous star formation in the recent past. Stars more massive than 21.5Msun are very scarce around SNR N49, implying that the magnetar SGR 0526-66 in this SNR was either formed elsewhere or came from a progenitor with a mass well below the 30Msun threshold suggested in the literature. Three of our four Ia SNRs are associated with old, metal poor stellar populations. This includes SNR 0509-67.5, which is known to have been originated by an extremely bright Type Ia event, and yet is located very far away from any sites of recent star formation, in a population with a mean age of 7.9 Gyr. The Type Ia SNR N103B, on the other hand, is associated with recent star formation, and might have had a relatively younger and more massive progenitor with substantial mass loss before the explosion. We discuss these results in the context of our present understanding of core collapse and Type Ia supernova progenitors.
A number of unsolved problems and open questions about the nature and the properties of supernovae are identified and briefly discussed. Some suggestions and directions toward possible solutions are also considered.
Neutrino with magnetic moment can experience a chirality flip while scattering off charged particles. This effect may lead to important consequences for the dynamics and the neutrino signal of the core-collapse supernova. It is known that if neutrino is a Dirac fermion, then nu_L->nu_R transition induced by the chirality flip leads to the emission of sterile right-handed neutrinos. The typical energies of these neutrinos are rather high, E ~ (100-200)MeV. Neutrino spin precession in the magnetic field either inside the collapsing star or in the interstellar space may lead to the backward transition, nu_R->nu_L. Both possibilities are known to be interesting. In the former case high-energy neutrinos can deliver additional energy to the supernova envelope, which can help the supernova to explode. In the latter case high-energy neutrinos may be detected simultaneously with the "normal" supernova neutrino signal, which would be a smoking gun for the Dirac neutrino magnetic moment. We report the results of the calculation of the supernova right-handed neutrino luminosity up to 250 ms after bounce. They allow to refine the estimates of the energy emitted in right-handed neutrinos. Also the sensitivity of water Cherenkov detectors to the Dirac neutrino magnetic moment is estimated. For mu_Dirac=10^{-13}mu_B Super-Kamiokande is expected to detect at least few high-energy events from a galactic supernova explosion.   Also we briefly discuss the case of Majorana neutrino magnetic moment. It is pointed out that spin flips may quickly equilibrate electron neutrinos with non-electron antineutrinos if mu_Majorana~10^{-12}mu_B. This may lead to various consequences for supernova physics.
We present 139 spectra of 124 Type Ia supernovae (SNeIa) that were observed at the ESO/VLT during the first three years of the Canada-France-Hawai Telescope (CFHT) Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS). This homogeneous data set is used to test for redshift evolution of SNeIa spectra, and will be used in the SNLS 3rd year cosmological analyses.   Spectra have been reduced and extracted with a dedicated pipeline that uses photometric information from deep CFHT Legacy Survey (CFHT-LS) reference images to trace, at sub-pixel accuracy, the position of the supernova on the spectrogram as a function of wavelength. It also separates the supernova and its host light in 60% of cases. The identification of the supernova candidates is performed using a spectrophotometric SNIa model.   A total of 124 SNeIa, roughly 50% of the overall SNLS spectroscopic sample, have been identified using the ESO/VLT during the first three years of the survey. Their redshifts range from z=0.149 to z=1.031. The average redshift of the sample is z=0.63+/-0.02. This constitutes the largest SNIa spectral set to date in this redshift range. The spectra are presented along with their best-fit spectral SNIa model and a host model where relevant. In the latter case, a host subtracted spectrum is also presented. We produce average spectra for pre-maximum, maximum and post-maximum epochs for both z<0.5 and z>=0.5 SNeIa. We find that z<0.5 spectra have deeper intermediate mass element absorptions than z>= 0.5 spectra. The differences with redshift are consistent with the selection of brighter and bluer supernovae at higher redshift.
The pre-explosion observations of the type II-P supernovae 2006my, 2006ov and 2004et, are re-analysed. In the cases of supernovae 2006my and 2006ov we argue that the published candidate progenitors are not coincident with their respective supernova sites in pre-explosion Hubble Space Telescope observations. We therefore derive upper luminosity and mass limits for the unseen progenitors of both these supernovae, assuming they are red supergiants: 2006my (log L/Lsun = 4.51; mass < 13Msun) and 2006ov (log L/Lsun = 4.29; mass < 10Msun). In the case of supernova 2004et we show that the yellow-supergiant progenitor candidate, originally identified in Canada France Hawaii Telescope images, is still visible ~3 years post-explosion in observations from the William Herschel Telescope. High-resolution Hubble Space Telescope and Gemini (North) adaptive optics late-time imagery reveal that this source is not a single yellow supergiant star, but rather is resolved into at least three distinct sources. We report the discovery of the unresolved progenitor as an excess of flux in pre-explosion Isaac Newton Telescope i'-band imaging. Accounting for the late-time contribution of the supernova using published optical spectra, we calculate the progenitor photometry as the difference between the pre- and post-explosion, ground-based observations. We find the progenitor was most likely a late K to late M-type supergiant of 8 +5/-1 Msun. In all cases we conclude that future, high-resolution observations of the supernova sites will be required to confirm these results.
The spectra of high-energy protons and nuclei accelerated by supernova remnant shocks are calculated taking into account magnetic field amplification and Alfvenic drift for different types of SNRs during their evolution. The overall energy spectrum and elemental composition of cosmic rays after propagation through the Galaxy are found.
The class of type Ic supernovae have drawn increasing attention since 1998 owing to their sparse association (only four so far) with long duration gamma-ray bursts. Although both phenomena originate from the core collapse of a massive star, supernovae emit mostly at optical wavelengths, whereas GRBs emit mostly in soft gamma-rays or hard X-rays. Though the GRB central engine generates ultra-relativistic jets, which beam the early emission into a narrow cone, no relativistic outflows have hitherto been found in type Ib/c supernovae explosions, despite theoretical expectations and searches. Here we report radio (interferometric) observations that reveal a mildly relativistic expansion in a nearby type Ic supernova, SN 2007gr. Using two observational epochs 60 days apart, we detect expansion of the source and establish a conservative lower limit for the average apparent expansion velocity of 0.6c. Independently, a second mildly relativistic supernova has been reported. Contrary to the radio data, optical observations of SN 2007gr indicate a typical type Ic supernova with ejecta velocities ~6000 km/s, much lower than in GRB-associated supernovae. We conclude that in SN 2007gr a small fraction of the ejecta produced a low-energy mildly relativistic bipolar radio jet, while the bulk of the ejecta were slower and, as shown by optical spectro-polarimetry, mildly aspherical.
We present preliminary results from two dimensional numerical studies of pair instability supernova (PSN). We study nuclear burning, hydrodynamic instabilities and explosion of very massive stars. Use a new radiation-hydrodynamics code, CASTRO.
Gravitational settling of 22Ne in cooling white dwarfs can affect the outcome of thermonuclear supernovae. We investigate how the supernova energetics and nucleosynthesis are in turn influenced by this process. We use realistic chemical profiles derived from state-of-the-art white dwarf cooling sequences. The cooling sequences provide a link between the white dwarf chemical structure and the age of the supernova progenitor system. The cooling sequence of a 1 M_sun white dwarf was computed until freezing using an up-to-date stellar evolutionary code. We computed explosions of both Chandrasekhar mass and sub-Chandrasekhar mass white dwarfs, assuming spherical symmetry and neglecting convective mixing during the pre-supernova carbon simmering phase to maximize the effects of chemical separation. Neither gravitational settling of 22Ne nor chemical differentiation of 12C and 16O have an appreciable impact on the properties of Type Ia supernovae, unless there is a direct dependence of the flame properties (density of transition from deflagration to detonation) on the chemical composition. At a fixed transition density, the maximum variation in the supernova magnitude obtained from progenitors of different ages is ~0.06 magnitudes, and even assuming an unrealistically large diffusion coefficient of 22Ne it would be less than ~0.09 mag. However, if the transition density depends on the chemical composition (all other things being equal) the oldest SNIa can be as much as 0.4 magnitudes brighter than the youngest ones (in our models the age difference is 7.4 Gyr). In addition, our results show that 22Ne sedimentation cannot be invoked to account for the formation of a central core of stable neutron-rich Fe-group nuclei in the ejecta of sub-Chandrasekhar models, as required by observations of Type Ia supernovae.
This paper presents the first results from a new citizen science project: Galaxy Zoo Supernovae. This proof of concept project uses members of the public to identify supernova candidates from the latest generation of wide-field imaging transient surveys. We describe the Galaxy Zoo Supernovae operations and scoring model, and demonstrate the effectiveness of this novel method using imaging data and transients from the Palomar Transient Factory (PTF). We examine the results collected over the period April-July 2010, during which nearly 14,000 supernova candidates from PTF were classified by more than 2,500 individuals within a few hours of data collection. We compare the transients selected by the citizen scientists to those identified by experienced PTF scanners, and find the agreement to be remarkable - Galaxy Zoo Supernovae performs comparably to the PTF scanners, and identified as transients 93% of the ~130 spectroscopically confirmed SNe that PTF located during the trial period (with no false positive identifications). Further analysis shows that only a small fraction of the lowest signal-to-noise SN detections (r > 19.5) are given low scores: Galaxy Zoo Supernovae correctly identifies all SNe with > 8{\sigma} detections in the PTF imaging data. The Galaxy Zoo Supernovae project has direct applicability to future transient searches such as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope, by both rapidly identifying candidate transient events, and via the training and improvement of existing machine classifier algorithms.
We show the preliminary results of our search for the progenitor systems of type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). We model binary populations our aim being to compare these models with the observations of detailed element abundances of the hot Intra-Cluster Medium.
Simple expressions for the radius and magnetic field of a system emitting Synchrotron-self-absorbed radio and Inverse Compton X-rays are derived from first principles which involve observable quantities only. These expressions are useful for analyzing observations of Supernova blastwaves interacting with dense circumstellar material at early times.
We present the discovery and follow-up observations of SN 2008jb, a core-collapse supernova in the dwarf irregular galaxy ESO 302-14 at 9.6 Mpc. This transient was missed by galaxy-targeted surveys and was only found in archival optical images obtained by CRTS and ASAS. It was detected shortly after explosion and reached a bright optical maximum, Vmax = 13.6 mag (M_Vmax ~ -16.5). The shape of the light curve shows a plateau of 100 days, followed by a drop of 1.4 mag in V-band to a decline with the approximate Co 56 decay slope, consistent with 0.04 Msun of Ni 56 synthesized in the explosion. A spectrum obtained 2 years after explosion shows a broad, boxy Halpha emission line, which is unusual for type IIP supernovae. We detect the supernova in archival Spitzer and WISE images obtained 8-14 months after explosion, which show clear signs of warm dust emission. The dwarf irregular host galaxy has a low gas-phase oxygen abundance, 12 + log(O/H) = 8.2 (~1/5 Solar), similar to those of the SMC and the hosts of long gamma-ray bursts and luminous core-collapse supernovae. We study the host environment using GALEX FUV, R-band, and Halpha images and find that the supernova occurred in a large star-formation complex. The morphology of the Halpha emission appears as a large shell (R = 350 pc) surrounding the FUV and optical emission. We estimate an age of ~9 Myr and a total mass of ~2 x 10^5 Msun for the star-formation complex. These properties are consistent with the expanding Halpha supershells observed in well-studied nearby dwarf galaxies, which are tell-tale signs of feedback from the cumulative effect of massive star winds and supernovae. The age estimated for the star-forming region suggests a relatively high-mass progenitor star with initial mass of ~20 Msun. We discuss the implications of these findings in the study of core-collapse supernova progenitors. (Abridged)
We present a sample of 485 photometrically identified Type Ia supernova candidates mined from the first three years of data of the CFHT SuperNova Legacy Survey (SNLS). The images were submitted to a deferred processing independent of the SNLS real-time detection pipeline. Light curves of all transient events were reconstructed in the g_M, r_M, i_M and z_M filters and submitted to automated sequential cuts in order to identify possible supernovae. Pure noise and long-term variable events were rejected by light curve shape criteria. Type Ia supernova identification relied on event characteristics fitted to their light curves assuming the events to be normal SNe Ia. The light curve fitter SALT2 was used for this purpose, assigning host galaxy photometric redshifts to the tested events. The selected sample of 485 candidates is one magnitude deeper than that allowed by the SNLS spectroscopic identification. The contamination by supernovae of other types is estimated to be 4%. Testing Hubble diagram residuals with this enlarged sample allows us to measure the Malmquist bias due to spectroscopic selections directly. The result is fully consistent with the precise Monte Carlo based estimate used to correct SN Ia distance moduli in the SNLS 3-year cosmological analyses. This paper demonstrates the feasibility of a photometric selection of high redshift supernovae with known host galaxy redshifts, opening interesting prospects for cosmological analyses from future large photometric SN Ia surveys.
Atmospheric neutrino oscillations with DeepCore; Supernova detection with IceCube and beyond; Study of South Pole ice transparency with IceCube flashers; Submitted papers to the 32nd International Cosmic Ray Conference, Beijing 2011.
The use of SN rates to probe explosion scenarios and to trace the cosmic star formation history received a boost from a number of synoptic surveys. There has been a recent claim of a mismatch by a factor of two between star formation and core collapse SN rates, and different explanations have been proposed for this discrepancy.} We attempted an independent test of the relation between star formation and supernova rates in the extreme environment of starburst galaxies, where both star formation and extinction are extremely high. To this aim we conducted an infrared supernova search in a sample of local starburts galaxies. The rational to search in the infrared is to reduce the bias due to extinction, which is one of the putative reasons for the observed discrepancy between star formation and supernova rates. To evaluate the outcome of the search we developed a MonteCarlo simulation tool that is used to predict the number and properties of the expected supernovae based on the search characteristics and the current understanding of starburst galaxies and supernovae. During the search we discovered 6 supernovae (4 with spectroscopic classification) which is in excellent agreement with the prediction of the MonteCarlo simulation tool that is, on average, $5.3\pm2.3$ events. The number of supernovae detected in starburst galaxies is consistent with that predicted from their high star formation rate when we recognize that a major fraction ($\sim 60%$) of the events remains hidden in the unaccessible, high density nuclear regions because of a combination of reduced search efficiency and high extinction.
Supernovae provide a backdrop from which we can probe the end state of stellar evolution in the final years before the progenitor star explodes. As the shock from the supernova expands, the timespan of mass loss history we are able to probe also extends, providing insight to rapid time-scale processes that govern the end state of massive stars. While supernovae transition into remnants on timescales of decades to centuries, observations of this phase are currently limited. Here we present observations of SN 1970G, serendipitously observed during the monitoring campaign of SN 2011fe that shares the same host galaxy. Utilizing the new Jansky Very Large Array upgrade and a deep X-ray exposure taken by the Chandra Space Telescope, we are able to recover this middle-aged supernova and distinctly resolve it from the HII cloud with which it is associated. We find that the flux density of SN 1970G has changed significantly since it was last observed - the X-ray luminosity has increased by a factor of ~3, while we observe a significantly lower radio flux of only 27.5 micro-Jy at 6.75 GHz, a level only detectable through the upgrades now in operation at the Jansky Very Large Array. These changes suggest that SN 1970G has entered a new stage of evolution towards a supernova remnant, and we may be detecting the turn-on of the pulsar wind nebula. Deep radio observations of additional middle-aged supernovae with the improved radio facilities will provide a statistical census of the delicate transition period between supernova and remnant.
Recent stellar evolution models show consistently that very massive metal-free stars evolve into red supergiants shortly before they explode. We argue that the envelopes of these stars, which will form pair-instability supernovae, become pulsationally unstable and that this will lead to extreme mass-loss rates despite the tiny metal content of the envelopes. We investigate the pulsational properties of such models and derive pulsationally induced mass-loss rates, which take the damping effects of the mass loss on the pulsations selfconsistently into account. We find that the pulsations may induce mass-loss rates of ~ 1e-4 - 1e-2 Msun/yr shortly before the explosions, which may create a dense circumstellar medium. Our results show that very massive stars with dense circumstellar media may stem from a wider initial mass range than pulsational-pair instability supernovae. The extreme mass loss will cease when so much of the hydrogen-rich envelope is lost that the star becomes more compact and stops pulsating. The helium core of these stars therefore remains unaffected, and their fate as pair-instability supernovae remains unaltered. The existence of dense circumstellar media around metal-free pair-instability supernovae can make them brighter and bluer, and they may be easier to detect at high redshifts than previously expected. We argue that the mass-loss enhancement in pair-instability supernova progenitors can naturally explain some observational properties of superluminous supernovae: the energetic explosions of stars within hydrogen-rich dense circumstellar media with little 56Ni production and the lack of a hydrogen-rich envelope in pair-instability supernova candidates with large 56Ni production.
Symbiotic stars are interacting binaries in which the first-formed white dwarf accretes and burns material from a red giant companion. This paper aims at presenting physical characteristics of these objects and discussing their possible link with progenitors of type Ia supernovae.
We apply a linearized stability analysis to simplified models of accretion-phase neutrino fluxes streaming from a supernova. We compare the results with recent numerical studies and find excellent agreement. This provides confidence that a linearized stability analysis can be further applied to more realistic models.
We explore the effect of the neutrino magnetic moment on neutrino scattering with matter in a core-collapse Supernova. We study the impact both on the neutrino fluxes and on the electron fraction. We find that sizeable modifications require very large magnetic moments both for Dirac and Majorana neutrinos.
It has been suggested that Type II supernovae with rapidly fading light curves (a.k.a. Type IIL supernovae) are explosions of progenitors with low-mass hydrogen-rich envelopes which are of the order of 1 Msun. We investigate light-curve properties of supernovae from such progenitors. We confirm that such progenitors lead to rapidly fading Type II supernovae. We find that the luminosity of supernovae from such progenitors with the canonical explosion energy of 1e51 erg and 56Ni mass of 0.05 Msun can increase temporarily shortly before all the hydrogen in the envelope recombines. As a result, a bump appears in their light curves. The bump appears because the heating from the nuclear decay of 56Ni can keep the bottom of hydrogen-rich layers in the ejecta ionized, and thus the photosphere can stay there for a while. We find that the light-curve bump becomes less significant when we make explosion energy larger (>~ 2e51 erg), 56Ni mass smaller (<~ 0.01 Msun), 56Ni mixed in the ejecta, or the progenitor radius larger. Helium mixing in hydrogen-rich layers makes the light-curve decline rates large but does not help reducing the light-curve bump. Because the light-curve bump we found in our light-curve models has not been observed in rapidly fading Type II supernovae, they may be characterized by not only low-mass hydrogen-rich envelopes but also higher explosion energy, larger degrees of 56Ni mixing, and/or larger progenitor radii than slowly fading Type II supernovae, so that the light-curve bump does not become significant.
This manuscript presents information for all supernovae discovered by the All-Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN) during 2015, its second full year of operations. The same information is presented for bright ($m_V\leq17$), spectroscopically confirmed supernovae discovered by other sources in 2015. As with the first ASAS-SN bright supernova catalog, we also present redshifts and near-UV through IR magnitudes for all supernova host galaxies in both samples. Combined with our previous catalog, this work comprises a complete catalog of 455 supernovae from multiple professional and amateur sources, allowing for population studies that were previously impossible. This is the second of a series of yearly papers on bright supernovae and their hosts from the ASAS-SN team.
New supernova surveys such as the Dark Energy Survey, Pan-STARRS and the LSST will produce an unprecedented number of photometric supernova candidates, most with no spectroscopic data. Avoiding biases in cosmological parameters due to the resulting inevitable contamination from non-Ia supernovae can be achieved with the BEAMS formalism, allowing for fully photometric supernova cosmology studies. Here we extend BEAMS to deal with the case in which the supernovae are correlated by systematic uncertainties. The analytical form of the full BEAMS posterior requires evaluating 2^N terms, where N is the number of supernova candidates. This `exponential catastrophe' is computationally unfeasible even for N of order 100. We circumvent the exponential catastrophe by marginalising numerically instead of analytically over the possible supernova types: we augment the cosmological parameters with nuisance parameters describing the covariance matrix and the types of all the supernovae, \tau_i, that we include in our MCMC analysis. We show that this method deals well even with large, unknown systematic uncertainties without a major increase in computational time, whereas ignoring the correlations can lead to significant biases and incorrect credible contours. We then compare the numerical marginalisation technique with a perturbative expansion of the posterior based on the insight that future surveys will have exquisite light curves and hence the probability that a given candidate is a Type Ia will be close to unity or zero, for most objects. Although this perturbative approach changes computation of the posterior from a 2^N problem into an N^2 or N^3 one, we show that it leads to biases in general through a small number of misclassifications, implying that numerical marginalisation is superior.
We present a new self-consistent and versatile method that derives photospheric radius and temperature variations of Type II-Plateau supernovae based on their expansion velocities and photometric measurements. We apply the method to a sample of 26 well-observed, nearby supernovae with published light curves and velocities. We simultaneously fit ~230 velocity and ~6800 magnitude measurements distributed over 21 photometric passbands spanning wavelengths from 0.19 to 2.2 microns. The light curve differences among the Type II-Plateau supernovae are well-modeled by assuming different rates of photospheric radius expansion, which we explain as different density profiles of the ejecta and we argue that steeper density profiles result in flatter plateaus, if everything else remains unchanged. The steep luminosity decline of Type II-Linear supernovae is due to fast evolution of the photospheric temperature, which we verify with a successful fit of SN1980K. Eliminating the need for theoretical supernova atmosphere models, we obtain self-consistent relative distances, reddenings, and nickel masses fully accounting for all internal model uncertainties and covariances. We use our global fit to estimate the time evolution of any missing band tailored specifically for each supernova and we construct spectral energy distributions and bolometric light curves. We produce bolometric corrections for all filter combinations in our sample. We compare our model to the theoretical dilution factors and find good agreement for the B and V filters. Our results differ from the theory when the I, J, H, or K bands are included. We investigate the reddening law towards our supernovae and find reasonable agreement with standard R_V ~ 3.1 reddening law in UBVRI bands. Results for other bands are inconclusive. We make our fitting code publicly available.
The gamma-ray observations of molecular clouds associated with supernova remnants are considered one of the most promising ways to search for a solution of the problem of cosmic ray origin. Here we briefly review the status of the field, with particular emphasis on the theoretical and phenomenological aspects of the problem.
Decades-long repeat observations of supernova SN1987A offer us unique, real-time insights into the violent death of a massive star and its long-term environmental effects, until its eventual switch-off.
We present a ground-based near-infrared search for lensed supernovae behind the massive cluster Abell 1689 at z=0.18, one of the most powerful gravitational telescopes that nature provides. Our survey was based on multi-epoch $J$-band observations with the HAWK-I instrument on VLT, with supporting optical data from the Nordic Optical Telescope. Our search resulted in the discovery of five high-redshift, $0.671<z<1.703$, photometrically classified core-collapse supernovae with magnifications in the range $\Delta m$ = $-0.31$ to $-1.58$ mag, as calculated from lensing models in the literature. Thanks to the power of the lensing cluster, the survey had the sensitivity to detect supernovae up to very high-redshifts, $z$$\sim$$3$, albeit for a limited region of space. We present a study of the core-collapse supernova rates for $0.4\leq z< 2.9$, and find good agreement with both previous estimates, and the predictions from the star formation history. During our survey, we also discovered 2 type Ia supernovae in A1689 cluster members, which allowed us to determine the cluster Ia rate to be $0.14^{+0.19}_{-0.09}\pm0.01$ $\rm{SNuB}$$\,h^2$ (SNuB$\equiv 10^{-12} \,\rm{SNe} \, L^{-1}_{\odot,B} yr^{-1}$). The cluster rate normalized by the stellar mass is $0.10^{+0.13}_{-0.06}\pm0.02$ in $\rm SNuM$$\,h^2$ (SNuM$\equiv 10^{-12} \,\rm{SNe} \, M^{-1}_{\odot} yr^{-1}$). Furthermore, we explore the optimal future survey for improving the core-collapse supernova rate measurements at $z\gtrsim2$ using gravitational telescopes, as well as for the detections with multiply lensed images, and find that the planned WFIRST space mission has excellent prospects. Massive clusters can be used as gravitational telescopes to significantly expand the survey range of supernova searches, with important implications for the study of the high-$z$ transient universe.
The observational cosmology with distant Type Ia supernovae (SNe) as standard candles claims that the Universe is in accelerated expansion, caused by a large fraction of dark energy. In this paper we investigate the SN Ia environment, studying the impact of the nature of their host galaxies on the Hubble diagram fitting. The supernovae (192 SNe) used in the analysis were extracted from Joint-Light-curves-Analysis (JLA) compilation of high-redshift and nearby supernovae which is the best one to date. The analysis is based on the empirical fact that SN Ia luminosities depend on their light curve shapes and colors. We confirm that the stretch parameter of Type Ia supernovae is correlated with the host galaxy type. The supernovae with lower stretch are hosted mainly in elliptical and lenticular galaxies. No significant correlation between SN Ia colour and host morphology was found.   We also examine how the luminosities of SNe Ia change depending on host galaxy morphology after stretch and colour corrections. Our results show that in old stellar populations and low dust environments, the supernovae are slightly fainter. SNe Ia in elliptical and lenticular galaxies have a higher $\alpha$ (slope in luminosity-stretch) and $\beta$ (slope in luminosity-colour) parameter than in spirals. However, the observed shift is at the 1-$\sigma$ uncertainty level and, therefore, can not be considered as significant.   We confirm that the supernova properties depend on their environment and that the incorporation of a host galaxy term into the Hubble diagram fit is expected to be crucial for future cosmological analyses.
A brief pedagogical review for students on basic physics of Superluminous Supernovae. Almost no references to literature are given, but important formulas are derived in some detail.
Superluminous supernovae are beginning to be discovered at redshifts as early as the epoch of reionization. A number of candidate mechanisms is reviewed, together with the discovery programs.
This catalog summarizes information for all supernovae discovered by the All-Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN) and all other bright ($m_{peak}\leq17$), spectroscopically confirmed supernovae discovered in 2016. We then gather the near-IR through UV magnitudes of all host galaxies and the offsets of the supernovae from the centers of their hosts from public databases. We illustrate the results using a sample that now totals 668 supernovae discovered since 2014 May 1, including the supernovae from our previous catalogs, with type distributions closely matching those of the ideal magnitude limited sample from Li et al. (2011). This is the third of a series of yearly papers on bright supernovae and their hosts from the ASAS-SN team.
It is shown that high-energy astrophysical neutrinos observed in the IceCube experiment can be produced by protons accelerated in extragalactic Type IIn supernova remnants by shocks propagating in the dense circumstellar medium. The nonlinear diffusive shock acceleration model is used for description of particle acceleration.
We report photometric and spectroscopic observations of the optical transient LSQ13zm. Historical data reveal the presence of an eruptive episode (that we label as `2013a') followed by a much brighter outburst (`2013b') three weeks later, that we argue to be the genuine supernova explosion. This sequence of events closely resemble those observed for SN2010mc and (in 2012) SN2009ip. The absolute magnitude reached by LSQ13zm during 2013a ($M_R=-14.87\pm0.25\,\rm{mag}$) is comparable with those of supernova impostors, while that of the 2013b event ($M_R=-18.46\pm0.21\,\rm{mag}$) is consistent with those of interacting supernovae. Our spectra reveal the presence of a dense and structured circumstellar medium, probably produced through numerous pre-supernova mass-loss events. In addition, we find evidence for high-velocity ejecta, with a fraction of gas expelled at more than 20000\kms. The spectra of LSQ13zm show remarkable similarity with those of well-studied core-collapse supernovae. From the analysis of the available photometric and spectroscopic data, we conclude that we first observed the last event of an eruptive sequence from a massive star, likely a Luminous Blue Variable, which a short time later exploded as a core-collapse supernova. The detailed analysis of archival images suggest that the host galaxy is a star-forming Blue Dwarf Compact Galaxy.
We present basic statistics for all supernovae discovered by the All-Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN) during its first year-and-a-half of operations, spanning 2013 and 2014. We also present the same information for all other bright ($m_V\leq17$), spectroscopically confirmed supernovae discovered from 2014 May 1 through the end of 2014, providing a comparison to the ASAS-SN sample starting from the point where ASAS-SN became operational in both hemispheres. In addition, we present collected redshifts and near-UV through IR magnitudes, where available, for all host galaxies of the bright supernovae in both samples. This work represents a comprehensive catalog of bright supernovae and their hosts from multiple professional and amateur sources, allowing for population studies that were not previously possible because the all-sky emphasis of ASAS-SN redresses many previously existing biases. In particular, ASAS-SN systematically finds bright supernovae closer to the centers of host galaxies than either other professional surveys or amateurs, a remarkable result given ASAS-SN's poorer angular resolution. This is the first of a series of yearly papers on bright supernovae and their hosts that will be released by the ASAS-SN team.
SN 1572, also known as the Tycho's Nova, was a supernova largely reported and discussed in the literature of the time. Here we talk about this literature. In the latest texts, we find also mentioned the Kepler's Nova, today known as SN 1604, and other newly observed stars. We discuss them too.
We present a comparison between several simulation codes designed to study the core-collapse supernova mechanism. We pay close attention to controlling the initial conditions and input physics in order to ensure a meaningful and informative comparison. Our goal is three-fold. First, we aim to demonstrate the current level of agreement between various groups studying the core-collapse supernova central engine. Second, we desire to form a strong basis for future simulation codes and methods to compare to. Lastly, we want this work to be a stepping stone for future work exploring more complex simulations of core-collapse supernovae, i.e., simulations in multiple dimensions and simulations with modern neutrino and nuclear physics. We compare the early (first ~500ms after core bounce) spherically-symmetric evolution of a 20 solar mass progenitor star from six different core-collapse supernovae codes: 3DnSNe-IDSA, AGILE-BOLTZTRAN, FLASH, F{\sc{ornax}}, GR1D, and PROMETHEUS-VERTEX. Given the diversity of neutrino transport and hydrodynamic methods employed, we find excellent agreement in many critical quantities, including the shock radius evolution and the amount of neutrino heating. Our results provide an excellent starting point from which to extend this comparison to higher dimensions and compare the development of hydrodynamic instabilities that are crucial to the supernova explosion mechanism, such as turbulence and convection.
The dependence of Hubble parameter on redshift can be determined directly from the dipole of luminosity distance to Supernovae Ia. We investigate the possibility of using the data on dipole of the luminosity distance obtained from the Supernovae Ia compilations SDSS, Union2.1, JLA and Pantheon to distinguish the dark energy models.
The large aperture and sensitive optical and near infrared imager spectrographs will enable an ELT system to observe some supernovae at large distances, deep into cosmological history when supernovae first began to occur.
We present neutrino capture cross sections on 13C at supernova neutrino energies, up to 50 MeV. For both charged-current and neutral-current reactions partial cross sections are calculated using statistical Hauser-Feschbach method. Coherent elastic neutrino scattering cross section for a 13C target is also provided.
An analytic model is presented for the fastest-declining Type I supernova SN2019bkc. The model of the central engine consists of the magnetic dipole radiation from a non-explosive remnant of a double white dwarf merger. We consider the viscous evolution of the rotating remnant, which may lead to the diminishing energy supply in an appropriate time scale for the light curve.
We report measurements of $\Omega_M$, $\Omega_\Lambda$, and w from eleven supernovae at z=0.36-0.86 with high-quality lightcurves measured using WFPC-2 on the HST. This is an independent set of high-redshift supernovae that confirms previous supernova evidence for an accelerating Universe. Combined with earlier Supernova Cosmology Project data, the new supernovae yield a flat-universe measurement of the mass density $\Omega_M=0.25^{+0.07}_{-0.06}$ (statistical) $\pm0.04$ (identified systematics), or equivalently, a cosmological constant of $\Omega_\Lambda=0.75^{+0.06}_{-0.07}$ (statistical) $\pm0.04$ (identified systematics). When the supernova results are combined with independent flat-universe measurements of $\Omega_M$ from CMB and galaxy redshift distortion data, they provide a measurement of $w=-1.05^{+0.15}_{-0.20}$ (statistical) $\pm0.09$ (identified systematic), if w is assumed to be constant in time. The new data offer greatly improved color measurements of the high-redshift supernovae, and hence improved host-galaxy extinction estimates. These extinction measurements show no anomalous negative E(B-V) at high redshift. The precision of the measurements is such that it is possible to perform a host-galaxy extinction correction directly for individual supernovae without any assumptions or priors on the parent E(B-V) distribution. Our cosmological fits using full extinction corrections confirm that dark energy is required with $P(\Omega_\Lambda>0)>0.99$, a result consistent with previous and current supernova analyses which rely upon the identification of a low-extinction subset or prior assumptions concerning the intrinsic extinction distribution.
We present an analysis of supernova light curves simulated for the upcoming Dark Energy Survey (DES) supernova search. The simulations employ a code suite that generates and fits realistic light curves in order to obtain distance modulus/redshift pairs that are passed to a cosmology fitter. We investigated several different survey strategies including field selection, supernova selection biases, and photometric redshift measurements. Using the results of this study, we chose a 30 square degree search area in the griz filter set. We forecast 1) that this survey will provide a homogeneous sample of up to 4000 Type Ia supernovae in the redshift range 0.05<z<1.2, and 2) that the increased red efficiency of the DES camera will significantly improve high-redshift color measurements. The redshift of each supernova with an identified host galaxy will be obtained from spectroscopic observations of the host. A supernova spectrum will be obtained for a subset of the sample, which will be utilized for control studies. In addition, we have investigated the use of combined photometric redshifts taking into account data from both the host and supernova. We have investigated and estimated the likely contamination from core-collapse supernovae based on photometric identification, and have found that a Type Ia supernova sample purity of up to 98% is obtainable given specific assumptions. Furthermore, we present systematic uncertainties due to sample purity, photometric calibration, dust extinction priors, filter-centroid shifts, and inter-calibration. We conclude by estimating the uncertainty on the cosmological parameters that will be measured from the DES supernova data.
A new, fully dynamic and self-consistent radiation hydrodynamics code, suitable for the calculation of supernovae light curves and continuum spectra, is described. It is a multigroup (frequency-dependent) code and includes all important $O(v/c)$ effects. It is applied to the model W7 of Nomoto, Thielemann, \& Yokoi (1984) for supernovae of type Ia. Radioactive energy deposition is incorporated through use of tables based upon Monte Carlo results. Effects of line opacity (both static or line blanketing and expansion or line blocking) are neglected, although these may prove to be important. At maximum light, models based upon different treatments of the opacity lead to values for $M_{B,max}$ in the range of -19.0 to -19.4. This range falls between the values for observed supernova claimed by Leibundgut \& Tammann (1990) and by Pierce, Ressler, \& Shure (1992).
Recent observations by the ROSAT X-ray satellite of the Vela supernova remnant have revealed, in addition to the previously identified compact nebula, a nearly circular emitting region with a radius of about 4 degrees. The Vela pulsar is slightly off the center of this circular region, consistent with its measured proper motion of about 100km/s and an age of about 10^4 yr. The emitting region is bounded by the main supernova shock. Just outside the shock, the X-ray image reveals several well-defined V-shaped features extending radially outwards. These features are most likely wakes produced by objects moving supersonically through the outside medium. The shapes and orientations of the wakes suggest that these objects have been ejected from the center of the supernova explosion. Their present positions indicate that they have been moving with a mean velocity of a few thousand km/s. We show that pre-existing objects, such as planets in orbit around the progenitor star, could not have been accelerated to sufficiently high velocities or would have been destroyed. Instead, we propose that the observed objects are fragments ejected during the formation of the neutron star. Fragmentation during gravitational collapse is a natural consequence of both convective and rotational instabilities.
We examine matter-enhanced neutrino flavor transformation ($\nu_{\tau(\mu)}\rightleftharpoons\nu_e$) in the region above the neutrino sphere in Type II supernovae. Our treatment explicitly includes contributions to the neutrino-propagation Hamiltonian from neutrino-neutrino forward scattering. A proper inclusion of these contributions shows that they have a completely negligible effect on the range of $\nu_e$-$\nu_{\tau(\mu)}$ vacuum mass-squared difference, $\delta m^2$, and vacuum mixing angle, $\theta$, or equivalently $\sin^22\theta$, required for enhanced supernova shock re-heating. When neutrino background effects are included, we find that $r$-process nucleosynthesis from neutrino-heated supernova ejecta remains a sensitive probe of the mixing between a light $\nu_e$ and a $\nu_{\tau(\mu)}$ with a cosmologically significant mass. Neutrino-neutrino scattering contributions are found to have a generally small effect on the $(\delta m^2,\ \sin^22\theta)$ parameter region probed by $r$-process nucleosynthesis. We point out that the nonlinear effects of the neutrino background extend the range of sensitivity of $r$-process nucleosynthesis to smaller values of $\delta m^2$.
We have used observations gathered at CTIO to measure distances by the Expanding Photosphere Method (EPM) to 5 Type II supernovae. These supernovae lie at redshifts from cz = 1100 km/s to z = 5500 km/s, and increase to 18 the number of distances measured using EPM. We compare distances derived to 11 Type II supernovae with distances to their host galaxies measured using the Tully-Fisher method. We find that the Tully-Fisher distances average 11%+-7% smaller. The comparison shows no significant evidence of any large distance-dependent bias in the Tully-Fisher distances. We employ the sample of EPM distances from 4.5~Mpc to 180~Mpc to derive a value for the Hubble Constant. We find H_0 = 73 +- 6 (statistical) +- 7 (systematic}) km/s/Mpc.
We propose that cosmic rays originate mainly in three sites, a) normal supernova explosions into the interstellar medium, b) supernova explosions into stellar winds, and c) hot spots of powerful radio galaxies. The proposal depends on an assumption about the scaling of the turbulent diffusive transport in cosmic ray mediated shock regions; the proposal also uses a specific model for the interstellar transport of cosmic rays. The model has been investigated in some detail and compared to i) the radio data of OB stars, Wolf Rayet stars, radio supernovae, radio supernova remnants, Gamma-ray line and continuum emission from starforming regions, and the cosmic ray electron spectrum, ii) the Akeno air shower data over the particle energy range from 10 TeV to EeV, and iii) the Akeno and Fly's Eye air shower data from 0.1 EeV to above 100 EeV. Here we specifically discuss in some detail the assumptions inherent in the model proposed, concerning the transport of energetic particles, first in the acceleration region, and second in the Galaxy.
The present understanding of type Ib/c supernovae and their connection to interacting binaries is reviewed. The problems of the classification and the lack of well-observed events exclude direct inference of progenitor characteristics. The absence of hydrogen lines in the observed spectrum, nevertheless, requires restricted evolutionary schemes to produce suitable progenitor stars for core collapse explosions with no hydrogen envelope. New relative statistics among the supernova types are presented which indicate that SN~Ib/c are on average brighter than SN~II, and with the dense sampling of supernova searches in nearby galaxies, a small intrinsic incidence of SN~Ib/c is determined. The small rates might be in conflict with the observed ratio of massive stars in binaries in the Galaxy.
Supernovae remnants are known to be luminous sources of infrared [FeII] emission. By studying how the luminosity scales with age, environment and other relevant factors, we can construct an [FeII] luminosity function for supernovae remnants. This will enable us to predict supernovae rates in starburst galaxies that are too distant for individual remnants to be resolved. First, however, we require accurate luminosities for a sample of remnants of varying ages, and in varying physical environments. As part of this project we have carried out an initial study of a small sample of evolved (ages greater than a few thousand years) remnants in M33. From these data we tentatively conclude that there is evidence for the peak luminosity in the [FeII] lines of these sources to arise in a narrow range of ages. In other respects, the M33 remnants are similar to their galactic and Magellanic Cloud counterparts in the observed peak luminosity. From this, and internal evidence as to the environment present in these regions, we conclude that the luminosity of evolved remnants is only marginally dependent on density and metallicity.
In order to investigate non-uniformity in the luminosity evolution of Type Ia supernovae, we fit the lightcurves with a multi-parameter empirical model. The model provides a quantitative method of analyzing the lightcurves of Type I supernovae and a convenient and continuous representation of the photometric data. Using photometry of the well-observed event SN 1994D we demonstrate the application of the model and construct a bolometric lightcurve. The rise time of the bolometric light curve can be estimated and compared to current theoretical models. By applying this model to a large number of SN Ia lightcurves in various filters, we can explore the variations among individual events and derive systematic correlations. We find that the initial decline rate after maximum light correlates with the decline rate at late phases. Such correlations can be used to constrain theoretical models.
Cross-filter K corrections for a sample of "normal" Type Ia supernovae (SNe) have been calculated for a range of epochs. With appropriate filter choices, the combined statistical and systematic K correction dispersion of the full sample lies within 0.05 mag for redshifts z<0.7. This narrow dispersion of the calculated K correction allows the Type Ia to be used as a cosmological probe. We use the K corrections with observations of seven SNe at redshifts 0.3 < z <0.5 to bound the possible difference between the locally measured Hubble constant (H_L) and the true cosmological Hubble constant (H_0).
Some dwarf spheroidal galaxies have experienced many Gyrs long periods without star formation. We show that Type Ia supernovae, formed from a first generation of stars, can delay a second epoch of star formation by several Gyrs, if the total gas mass in the dwarf spheroidals is smaller than $10^8 M_{\odot}$. The details depend on the assumed Type Ia supernova model and the mass fraction of stars formed in the first population. This scenario requires that dwarf spheroidals be confined by dark matter halos, as otherwise the heated gas would have been lost due to tidal effects and galactic winds. If Type Ia supernovae played an important role, heating the gas in dwarf spheroidals, they should also have increased their iron abundance during the epoch without star formation. The subsequent stellar generation should then start with a higher [Fe/H] than that of the most iron-rich stars found in the previous generation.
We perform an extensive investigation of the sensitivity to non-vanishing tau-neutrino mass in a large water Cherenkov detector, developing an analysis method for neutrino events originated by a supernova explosion. This approach, based on directional considerations, provides informations almost undepending on the supernova model. We analyze several theoretical models from numerical simulations and phenomenological models based on SN1987A data, and determine optimal values of the analysis parameters so as to reach the highest sensitivity to a non-vanishing tau-neutrino mass. The minimal detectable mass is generally just above the cosmologically interesting range, m ~ 100 eV, in the case of a supernova explosion near the galactic center. For the case that no positive signal is obtained, observation of a neutrino burst with Super-Kamiokande will anyhow lower the present upper bound on tau-neutrino mass to few hundred eV.
Gamma-rays from the decay of $^{26}$Al offer a stringent constraint on the Galaxy's global star formation rate over the past million years, supplementing other methods for quantifying the recent Galactic star formation rate, such as equivalent widths of H$\alpha$ emission. Advantages and disadvantages of using $^{26}$Al gamma-ray measurements as a tracer of the massive star formation rate are analyzed. Estimates of the Galactic $^{26}$Al mass derived from COMPTEL measurements are coupled with a simple, analytical model of the $^{26}$Al injection rate from massive stars and restrict the Galaxy's recent star formation rate to \hbox{5 $\pm$ 4 M\sun yr$^{-1}$}. In addition, we show that the derived $^{26}$Al mass implies a present day \hbox{Type II + Ib} supernovae rate of 3.4 $\pm$ 2.8 per century, which seems consistent with other independent estimates of the Galactic core collapse supernova rate. If some independent measure of the massive star initial mass function or star formation rate or \hbox{Type II + Ib} supernovae rate were to become available (perhaps through estimates of the Galactic $^{60}$Fe mass), then a convenient way to restrain, or possibly determine, the other parameters is presented.
Recently, Dicus and Repko computed nu gamma --> nu gamma gamma for energies below the threshold for e^{+}e^{-} pair production. They found across section on the order of 10^{-52} omega ^{gamma} with gamma =10, where omega is the CMS energy of one of the initial particles in MeV. Cross sections for the crossed processes are the same to factors of order one. This note investigates the extent to which these processes could, if their result extrapolates past 1 MeV: affect supernova dynamics; cut off the energy distribution of very high energy cosmic photons and neutrinos; and possibly give rise to an observable gamma signal from scattering of neutrinos from one supernova by those of a second supernova close in space and time. We also estimate, from Supernova 1987A, that, in the region above a few MeV, gamma must fall below 8.4.
The abundances of beryllium and boron have been measured in halo stars of metallicities as low as [Fe/H] =-3. The observations show that the ratios Be/Fe and B/Fe are independent of metallicity and approximately equal to their solar values over the entire range of observed metallicity. These observations are in contradiction with the predictions of simple models of beryllium and boron production by spallation in the interstellar medium of a well mixed galaxy. We propose that beryllium and boron are produced by spallation in the ejecta of type II supernovae. In our picture, protons and alpha particles are accelerated early in the supernova event and irradiate the heavy elements in the ejecta long before the ejecta mixes with the interstellar medium. We follow the propagation of the accelerated particles with a Monte-Carlo code and find that the energy per spallation reaction is about 5 GeV for a variety of initial particle spectra and ejecta compositions. Reproducing the observed Be/Fe and B/Fe ratios requires roughly 3 times 10^{47} ergs of accelerated protons and alphas. This is much less than the 10^{51} ergs available in a supernova explosion.
A multi-wavelength investigation of the candidate supernova remnant G63.7+1.1 and its surrounding interstellar medium is presented. On the basis of radio continuum data we conclude that the object is a filled-center supernova remnant, perhaps in the course of becoming a composite remnant. The morphology of the remnant, along with HI, 12CO and high resolution IRAS data, suggest that G63.7+1.1 is interacting directly with the ISM, and does not lie in a low density region of the ISM. This in turn strongly suggests that the detected nebula is not surrounded by an invisible halo of supernova ejecta. The association between the SNR and HI and CO features near the tangent point implies a kinematic distance for G63.7+1.1 of 3.8 +/- 1.5 kpc.
The observation of neutrinos from Supernova~1987A has confirmed the theoretical conjecture that these particles play a crucial role during the collapse of the core of a massive star. Only one per cent of the energy they carry away from the newly formed neutron star may account for all the kinetic and electromagnetic energy responsible for the spectacular display of the supernova explosion. However, the neutrinos emitted from the collapsed stellar core at the center of the explosion couple so weakly to the surrounding matter that convective processes behind the supernova shock and/or inside the nascent neutron star might be required to increase the efficiency of the energy transfer to the stellar mantle and envelope. The conditions for a successful explosion by the neutrino-heating mechanism and the possible importance of convection in and around the neutron star are shortly reviewed.
A chemical evolution model following the evolution of the abundances of H, He, C, N, O and Fe for dwarf irregular and blue compact galaxies is presented. This model takes into account detailed nucleosynthesis and computes in detail the rates of supernovae of type II and I. The star formation is assumed to have proceeded in short but intense bursts. The novelty relative to previous models is that the development of a galactic wind is studied in detail by taking into account the energy injected into the interstellar medium (ISM) from both supernovae and stellar winds from massive stars as well as the presence of dark matter halos. Both metal enriched and normal winds have been considered. Our main conclusions are: i) a substantial amount of dark matter (from 1 to 50 times larger than the luminous matter) is required in order to avoid the complete destruction of such galaxies during strong starbursts, and ii) the energy injected by stellar winds and type Ia supernovae into the ISM is negligible relative to the total thermal energy, and in particular to the type II supernovae, which in fact, dominate the energetics during starbursts.
The dispersion in the peak luminosities of high redshift type Ia supernovae will change with redshift due to gravitational lensing. This lensing is investigated with an emphasis on the prospects of measuring it and separating it from other possible sources of redshift dependent dispersion. Measuring the lensing induced dispersion would directly constrain the power spectrum of density fluctuations on smaller length scales than are easily probed in any other way. The skew of the magnification distribution is related to the bispectrum of density fluctuations. Using cold dark matter models it is found that the amount and quality of data needed is attainable in a few years. A parameterization of the signal as a power law of the angular size distance to the supernovae is motivated by these models. This information can be used in detecting lensing, detecting other systematic changes in supernovae and calculating the uncertainties in cosmological parameter estimates.
We present an empirical method which measures the distance to a Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) with a precision of ~ 10% from a single night's data. This method measures the supernova's age and luminosity/light-curve parameter from a spectrum, and the extinction and distance from an apparent magnitude and color. We are able to verify the precision of this method from error propagation calculations, Monte Carlo simulations of well-sampled SNe Ia, and the Hubble diagram of scarcely observed supernovae. With the reduction in telescope time needed, this method is three to four times more efficient for measuring cosmological parameters than conventional light-curve based distance estimates.
Recent observations of supernovae, supernova remnants, and radio pulsars suggest that there are correlations between pulsar kicks and spins, infrared and gamma-ray line profiles, supernova polarizations, and ejecta debris fields. A framework is emerging in which explosion asymmetries play a central role. The new perspective meshes recent multi-dimensional theoretical investigations of the explosion mechanism with trends in $^{56}$Ni yields and explosion kinetic energies. These trends imply that the mass above which black holes form after collapse is $\sim$30 M$_{\odot}$ and that supernova explosion energies may vary by as much as a factor of four. In addition, new neutrino-matter opacity calculations reveal that the inner cores of protoneutron stars are more transparent than hitherto suspected. This may have consequences for the delayed neutrino-driven mechanism of explosion itself.
Neutrinos emitted during stellar core collapse leading to a supernova are primarily of the electron neutrino type at source which may undergo oscillation between flavor eigenstates during propagation to an earth-bound detector. Although the number of neutrinos emitted during the pre-bounce collapse phase is much smaller than that emitted in the post-bounce phase (in which all flavors of neutrinos are emitted), a nearby supernova event may nevertheless register a substantial number of detections from the pre-bounce phase at SuperKamiokande (SK) and the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO). The calorimetric measurement of the supernova neutrino fluence from this stage via the charge current and neutral current detection channels in SNO and the corresponding distortion of detected spectrum in SK over the no-oscillation spectrum, can probe information about neutrino mass difference and mixing which are illustrated here in terms of two- and three-flavor oscillation models.
Be abundances at low metallicities have major implications on cosmic ray origin, requiring acceleration out of fresh supernova ejecta. The observed, essentially constant Be/Fe fixes the Be production per SNII, allowing the determination of the energy supplied to cosmic rays per SNII. The results rule out acceleration out of the metal-poor ISM, and favor Be production at all epochs of Galactic evolution by cosmic rays having the same spectrum and source composition as those at the current epoch. Individual supernova acceleration of its own nucleosynthetic products and the collective acceleration by SN shocks of ejecta-enriched matter in the interiors of superbubbles have been proposed for such origin. A new Monte-Carlo based evolutionary code, into which the concept of Be and Fe production per supernova is explicitly built in, yields the supernova acceleration efficiency, 2% for the refractory metals and 12% for all the cosmic rays.
We show how Type Ia/II supernova rates at various redshifts can be used to follow the cosmic star formation rate (CSFR) history. Using the recent e stimate of the Cosmic Star Formation (CSFR), we compute the predicted cosmic Type Ia/II supernovae rates.   We show that while SNII rates provide a direct measurement of the instantaneous CSFR, the SNIa rate depends on the past history of the CSFR. This provides us with a new and independent diagnostic of the star formation rate. The comparison with the data are in good agreement with both local and high-$z$ measurement and provides an additional evid ence of the validity of the CSFR up to $z = 1$, but suggests higer values at $z > 1$ co nsistent with the presence of extinction effects. Measurement of SNIa rate up to $z {\s im}$ 1 will be crucial for our understanding of the star formation history at early epo chs $z > 1$. We also show that current observations on Type Ia supernovae rate already give us valubale information on the nature of their progenitors.
SNR0540-69 is a supernova remnant in the LMC, harbouring a young (~1600 yrs) radio/optical/X-ray pulsar (P=50 ms). Ground based Halpha imaging of the region has shown a unique spiral-like structure centered around the pulsar. In narrow band HST imaging, the feature seems resolved in a ring-like structure, probably ejected by the progenitor star in a pre-supernova phase (> 10^4 yrs ago).
Three different models have been proposed for LiBeB production by cosmic rays: the CRI model in which the cosmic rays are accelerated out of an ISM of solar composition scaled with metallicity; the CRS model in which cosmic rays with composition similar to that of the current epoch cosmic rays are accelerated out of fresh supernova ejecta; and the LECR model in which a distinct low energy component coexists with the postulated cosmic rays of the CRI model. These models are usually distinguished by their predictions concerning the evolution of the Be and B abundances. Here we emphasize the energetics which favor the CRS model. This model is also favored by observations showing that the bulk (80 to 90%) of all supernovae occur in hot, low density superbubbles, where supernova shocks can accelerate the cosmic rays from supernova ejecta enriched matter.
The results of the 2D modelling of Supernova remnant (SNR) RCW86 are given. Models of this remnant, which for the first time interpret the anisotropy of surface brightness as a result of the evolution of adiabatic SNR in the interstellar medium with a large-scale gradient of density, are considered. Estimations on the basic characteristics of RCW86 and the surrounding medium which follow from these models are found. It is shown that the observed surface brightness distribution of RCW86 may be obtaned in the both proposed up till now models with different initial assumptions: one about a Supernova explosion in 185 A.D. and another about an explosion in the OB-asossiation. In order to obtain the observational contrast of surface brightness it is necessary to have a medium with the characteristic scale of nonuniformity 11 pc if the age of RCW86 is 1800 years or 20-25 pc when the SNR is distant from us on 2.8 kpc. The preshock density contrast between the southwestern and northeastern parts of RCW86 is in range 3.5-4.5.
We use recent information on geodetic precession of the binary pulsar B1913+16 along with measurements of its orbital parameters and proper motion to derive new constraints on the immediate progenitor of this double neutron star system. As part of our analysis we model the motion of the binary in the Galaxy after the second supernova explosion, and we derive constraints on the unknown radial velocity. We also obtain limits on the magnitude and direction of the kick velocity imparted to the pulsar companion during the second supernova explosion. We consider the complete set of possible cases, depending on the kinematic age of the system and the 180 degree ambiguity in the pulsar spin orientation. Most interestingly, we find that the natal kick must have been directed almost perpendicular to the spin axis of the neutron star progenitor, independent of the specific pre-supernova configuration. Such a tight constraint on the kick direction has important implications for the physical mechanism responsible for the kick.
At the time of its discovery, the optical and X-ray afterglow of GRB 970228 appeared to be a ringing endorsement of the previously untried relativistic fireball model of gamma-ray burst (GRB) afterglows, but now that nearly a dozen optical afterglows to GRBs have been observed, the wavering light curve and reddening spectrum of this afterglow make it perhaps the most difficult of the observed afterglows to reconcile with the fireball model. In this Letter, we argue that this afterglow's unusual temporal and spectral properties can be attributed to a supernova that overtook the light curve nearly two weeks after the GRB. This is the strongest case yet for a GRB/supernova connection. It strengthens the case that a supernova also dominated the late afterglow of GRB 980326, and the case that GRB 980425 is related to SN 1998bw.
Supernova (SN) light echoes could be a powerful tool for determining distances to galaxies geometrically, Sparks 1994. In this paper we present CCD photometry of the environments of 64 historical supernovae, the first results of a program designed to search for light echoes from these SNe. We commonly find patches of optical emission at, or close to, the sites of the supernovae. The color distribution of these patches is broad, and generally consistent with stellar population colors, possibly with some reddening. However there are in addition patches with both unusually red and unusually blue colors. We expect light echoes to be blue, and while none of the objects are quite as blue in V-R as the known light echo of SN1991T, there are features that are unusually blue and we identify these as candidate light echoes for follow-on observations.
Ten years after the publication of the previous release, we present a new edition of the Asiago Supernova Catalogue updated to December 31, 1998 and containing data for 1447 supernovae and their parent galaxies\footnote{Tables 1 and 2 are only available in electronic form at the CDS via anonymous ftp to cdsarc.u-strasbg.fr (130.79.128.5) or via http://cdsweb.u-strasbg.fr/Abstract.html}. In addition to list the data for a large number of new SNe, we made an effort to search the literature for new information on past SNe as well. We also tried to update and homogenize the data for the parent galaxies. To allow a global view of the Catalogue, a few descriptive figures and a summary table is reported. The present Catalogue is intended as a large and modern database for statistical studies on the supernova phenomenon.
Thanks to mid-infrared observations, we provide new clues to the element mixing during a supernova explosion by probing the mixing between three adjacent layers: the oxygen burning products layer (sulfur, argon,...), the silicate layer and the neon layer. The silicate and neon layers are both contaminated by sulfur and argon in a macroscopic way, but appear segregated, so that the mixing is heterogeneous. This finding complements the microscopic mixing information deduced from presolar grains found in meteorites and implies that, at present time, supernovae are probably not the main dust factory in the Galaxy. The mixing is often interpreted in terms of hydrodynamical instabilities driven by the outward shock following the implosion of the supernova core. Testing whether such instabilities can lead to the injection of material from a layer into upper layers without complete mixing, as suggested by the observations presented in this paper, should be possible with the intense lasers which are starting to be used to simulate astrophysical plasmas.
The fact that the majority of the youngest radio pulsars are surrounded by expanding supernova remnants is strong evidence that neutron stars are produced in the supernovae of massive stars. In many cases, the pulsar appears significantly offset from the geometric centre of the supernova remnant, indicating that the neutron star has moved away from the site of the explosion with a substantial space velocity since birth. Here we show that the these offsets show an overwhelming preference for one sign in terms of Galactic longitude, a result that has important implications for the number of genuine associations. The origin of this statistically significant effect may lie in a differential Galactic rotational velocity between stars and gas in the interstellar medium.
The ultraluminous supernova remnant (SNR) in NGC 6946 is the brightest known SNR in X-rays, ~1000 times brighter than Cas A. To probe the nature of this remnant and its progenitor, we have obtained high-dispersion optical echelle spectra. The echelle spectra detect H-alpha, [N II], and [O III] lines, and resolve these lines into a narrow (FWHM ~20--40 km/s) component from un-shocked material and a broad (FWHM ~250 km/s) component from shocked material. Both narrow and broad components have unusually high [N II]/H-alpha ratios, ~1. Using the echelle observation, archival HST images, and archival ROSAT X-ray observations, we conclude that the SNR was produced by a normal supernova, whose progenitor was a massive star, either a WN star or a luminous blue variable. The high luminosity of the remnant is caused by the supernova ejecta expanding into a dense, nitrogen-rich circumstellar nebula created by the progenitor.
If a black hole formed in a core-collapse supernova is accreting material from the base of the envelope, the accretion luminosity could be observable in the supernova light curve. We present results of a fully relativistic numerical investigation of the fallback of matter onto a black hole in a supernova and examine conditions which would be favorable for detection of the black hole. In general, heating by radioactive decays is likely to prevent practical detection of the black hole, but we show that low energy explosions of more massive stars may provide an important exception. We emphasize the particular case of SN1997D in NGC1536, for which we predict that the presence of a black hole could be inferred observationally within the next year.
An upper bound to the supernova relic neutrino background from all past Type II supernovae is obtained using observations of the Universal metal enrichment history. We show that an unambiguous detection of these relic neutrinos by the Super-Kamiokande detector is unlikely. We also analyze the event rate in the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (where coincident neutrons from anti-nu_e + D --> n + n + e+ might enhance background rejection), and arrive at the same conclusion. If the relic neutrino flux should be observed to exceed our upper bound and if the observations of the metal enrichment history (for z<1) are not in considerable error, then either the Type II supernova rate does not track the metal enrichment history or some mechanism may be responsible for transforming anti-nu_{mu,tau} --> anti-nu_e.
Feedback effects due to massive stars and supernovae in the first objects are shown to strongly regulate both galaxy formation/evolution and the reionization process. Here we review the most important ones in some detail. We discuss how Type II supernovae can be used as tracers of the first objects and detected with NGST, for which we predict supernova number counts including the effects of gravitational lensing. Preliminary results on the formation of dust in the ejecta of supernovae of primordial composition are also presented. We finally turn to the consideration of the process of inhomogeneous reionization due to primordial stellar sources by means of high resolution numerical simulations, allowing for a self-consistent treatment of the above feedback processes. These simulations allow us to draw conclusions on the evolution and epoch of reionization and about the fate of reionizing objects. We conclude that a large fraction (~ 99%) of collapsed objects must be dark at redshift around eight.
A variety of stellar explosions powered by black hole accretion are discussed. All involve the failure of neutrino energy deposition to launch a strong supernova explosion. A key quantity which determines the type of high energy transient produced is the ratio of the engine operation time, $\rm t_{engine}$, to the time for the explosion to break out of the stellar surface, $\rm t_{bo}$. Stars with sufficient angular momentum produce collapsars -- black holes accreting rapidly through a disk -- in their centers. Collapsars can occur in stars with a wide range of radii depending on the amount of pre-collapse mass loss. The stellar radius and jet properties determine the degree of beaming of the explosion. In some cases the stellar envelope serves to focus the explosion to narrow beaming angles. The baryon loading of various models for classical GRBs formed in massive stars is examined and the consequences are explored. For $\rm t_{engine} > t_{bo}$, highly relativistic outflow is possible and classical GRBs accompanied by supernovae can be produced. In other cases hyper-energetic, asymmetric supernovae are produced. Longer GRBs ($t \gtaprx 100 \s$) can be produced by fallback following a weak neutrino-driven supernova explosion.
We suggest that a neutron star with a strong magnetic field, spiraling into the envelope of a companion star, can generate a ``companion induced SN-like off-center explosion". The strongly magnetized neutron star ("magnetar") is born in a supernova explosion before entering into an expanding envelope of a supergiant companion. If the neutron star collapses into a black hole via the hypercritical accretion during the spiral-in phase, a rapidly rotating black hole with a strong magnetic field at the horizon results. The Blandford-Znajek power is sufficient to power a supernova-like event with the center of explosion displaced from the companion core. The companion core, after explosion, evolves into a C/O-white dwarf or a neutron star with a second explosion. The detection of highly eccentric black-hole, C/O-white dwarf binaries or the double explosion structures in the supernova remnants could be an evidence of the proposed scenario.
We report on the X-ray observation of the radio selected supernova SN1979C carried out with ASCA in December 1997. The supernova of type II$_{L}$ was first observed in the optical and occurred in the weakly barred, almost face on spiral galaxy NGC 4321 (M100) which is at a distance of 17.1 Mpc, and contains at least three other supernovae discovered in this century. No point source was detected at the radio position of SN1979C in a 3' diameter half power response circle in a 27.3 ks SIS exposure. The background and galaxy subtracted SN signal had a 3$\sigma$ upper limit to the count rate of 1.2$\times 10^{-3}$ cps in the full ASCA SIS band (0.4-10.0 keV). These measurements give the first ever x-ray flux limit of a Type II$_{L}$ SN in the higher energy band ($\geq$ 2 keV) which is an important diagnostic of the {\it outgoing} shock wave ploughing through the circumstellar medium.
Evolutionary effects with redshift of core collapse supernovae and their application to cosmology have been studied based on an extensive grid of stellar models between 13 and 25 Mo, and their light curves after the explosion.   With decreasing metallicity Z and increasing mass, progenitors tend to explode as compact Blue Supergiants (BSG) and produce subluminous supernovae which are about 1.5 mag. dimmer compared to 'normal' SNeII with Red Supergiant (RSG) progenitors. Progenitors with small masses tend to explode as RSGs even with low Z. The consequences are obvious for probing the chemical evolution.   We identify 'extreme SNe IIp' supernovae as a rather homogeneous class which may allow their use as standard candles for distance determination accurate within 30 %. Due to their unique light curves, no spectra need to be taken for their identification, and follow-up observations can be limited to a very small dynamical range in brightness. This means that distance determination by 'extreme SNe IIp" are possible up to redshifts of about 3 using 8-meter class telescopes. SIRTIF may push the limit by another magnitude.
Observations of type Ia supernovae at high redshifts have become an important tool for studying the geometry of the universe. The relation between the duration of the peak phase of a type Ia supernova's lightcurve and its luminosity (broader is brighter) forms the cornerstone of this measurement, yet it is a purely empirical relation. In this paper we show that the relation is a natural consequence of the radiation transport in type Ia supernovae and suggest constraints on the nature of the explosions which arise from our interpretation of the observed relation. The principle parameter underlying the relation is the mass of radioactive 56Ni produced in the explosion. The relation is shown to be relatively insensitive to most other parameters in Chandrasekhar-mass explosions. Cosmological results are thus unlikely to suffer from systematic effects stemming from evolution in the explosions' progenitors.
Because calibrated light curves of Type Ia supernovae have become a major tool to determine the local expansion rate of the Universe and also its geometrical structure, considerable attention has been given to models of these events over the past couple of years. There are good reasons to believe that perhaps most Type Ia supernovae are the explosions of white dwarfs that have approached the Chandrasekhar mass, M_ch ~ 1.39 M_sun, and are disrupted by thermonuclear fusion of carbon and oxygen. However, the mechanism whereby such accreting carbon-oxygen white dwarfs explode continues to be uncertain. Recent progress in modeling Type Ia supernovae as well as several of the still open questions are addressed in this review. Although the main emphasis will be on studies of the explosion mechanism itself and on the related physical processes, including the physics of turbulent nuclear combustion in degenerate stars, we also discuss observational constraints.
Intense fluxes of neutrinos are emitted by the hot neutron star produced in a supernova. The electron neutrino and antineutrino capture reactions on neutrons and protons, respectively, provide heating to drive a wind from the hot neutron star. The same reactions also determine the neutron-richness of the wind material. Nucleosynthesis via rapid neutron capture, the r-process, may occur in the wind material as it expands away from the neutron star. The neutron-richness of the wind material, and hence, the r-process nucleosynthesis therein, are sensitive to mixing between the muon (or tauon) neutrino/antineutrino and the electron (or sterile) neutrino/antineutrino. Indirect arguments and direct tests for the supernova origin of the r-process elements are discussed with a goal to establish supernova r-process nucleosynthesis as an important probe for neutrino mixing.
A new facility to measure neutrino mass differences and mixing angles and neutrino-nucleus cross sections, such as the proposed ORLaND facility at Oak Ridge, would contribute to the experimental determination of vacuum mixing parameters and would provide an experimental foundation for the many neutrino-nucleus weak interaction rates needed in supernova models. This would enable more realistic supernova models and a far greater ability to cull fundamental physics from these models by comparing them with detailed observations. Charged- and neutral-current neutrino interactions on nuclei in the stellar core play a central role in supernova dynamics, nucleosynthesis, and neutrino detection. Measurements of these reactions on select, judiciously chosen targets would provide an invaluable test of the complex theoretical models used to compute the neutrino-nucleus cross sections.
We present a distance to NGC 4527, the host galaxy of the type Ia SN 1991T, measured by surface brightness fluctuations. This supernova has been labelled ``peculiar'' both on the grounds of its spectroscopic behaviour and its apparent overluminosity with respect to other supernovae. The distance modulus to NGC 4527 and thus to SN 1991T is 30.26+-0.09. This relatively short distance largely removes the discrepancy with other Ia supernovae having similar light-curve characteristics and also removes the motivation for interpreting SN 1991T as a super-Chandrasekhar explosion. However, the reddening uncertainty results in significant uncertainty of the absolute magnitudes.
Type Ia supernovae are thought to explode completely, leaving no condensed remnant, only an expanding shell. Other types of supernovae are thought to involve core collapse and are expected to leave a condensed remnant, which could be either a neutron star or a black hole, or just possibly, something more exotic, such as a quark orstrange star, a naked singularity, a frozen star, a wormhole or a red hole. It has proven surprisingly difficult to determine which type of condensed remnant has been formed in those cases where the diagnostic highly regular pulsar signature of a neutron star is absent. We consider possible observational differences between the two standard candidates, as well as the more speculative alternatives.   We classify condensed remnants according to whether they do or do not possess three major features: 1)a hard surface, 2)an event horizon, and 3)a singularity. Black holes and neutron stars differ on all three criteria. Some of the less frequently considered alternatives are "intermediate," in the sense that they possess some of the traits of a black hole and some of the traits of a neutron star. This possibility makes distinguishing the various possibilities even more difficult.
We report on Australia Telescope Compact Array observations in the direction of the young high magnetic-field pulsar J1119-6127. In the resulting images we identify a non-thermal radio shell of diameter 15', which we classify as a previously uncatalogued young supernova remnant, G292.2-0.5. This supernova remnant is positionally coincident with PSR J1119-6127, and we conclude that the two objects are physically associated. No radio emission is detected from any pulsar wind nebula (PWN) associated with the pulsar; our observed upper limits are consistent with the expectation that high magnetic-field pulsars produce radio nebulae which fade rapidly. This system suggests a possible explanation for the lack of an associated radio pulsar and/or PWN in many supernova remnants.
The Crab nebula is the remnant of supernova 1054 (SN 1054). The progenitor of this supernova has, based on nucleosynthesis arguments, been modeled as an 8-10 solar mass star. Here we point out that the observations of the late light curve of SN 1054, from the historical records, are not compatible with the standard scenario, in which the late time emission is powered by the radioactive decay of small amounts of Ni-56. Based on model calculations we quantify this discrepancy. The rather large mass of Ni-56 needed to power the late time emission, 0.06[-0.03,+0.02] solar masses, seems inconsistent with abundances in the Crab nebula. The late light curve may well have been powered by the pulsar, which would make SN 1054 unique in this respect. Alternatively, the late light curve could have been powered by circumstellar interaction, in accordance with scenarios in which 8-10 solar mass stars are progenitors to `dense wind' supernovae.
The current big-bang cosmological model requires re-introduction of Einstein's "regretted" old cosmological constant to fit the astronomical measurements of supernova Ia magnitude versus redshift. The physical basis of the cosmological constant and the resulting acceleration of the universe are not supported by any other physical evidence and some advise caution in rushing to its acceptance. An altogether new cosmological model with only one adjustable parameter, the present age of the universe, does provide an excellent prediction of the supernova measurements without the cosmological constant. With a minimum description of the new model, a full set of equations is presented here sufficient to calculate the peak effective magnitude of a type Ia supernova for an input value of redshift Z and age t0. A full description of the model, together with many more falsifiable predictions, are presented elsewhere.
Supernovae are expected to occur near the molecular material in which the massive progenitor star was born, except in cases where the photoionizing radiation and winds from the progenitor star and its neighbors have cleared out a region. The clumpy structure in molecular clouds is crucial for the remnant evolution; the supernova shock front can become radiative in the interclump medium and the radiative shell then collides with molecular clumps. The interaction is relevant to a number of phenomena: the hydrodynamics of a magnetically supported dense shell interacting with molecular clumps; the molecular emission from shock waves, including the production of the OH 1720 MHz maser line; the relativistic particle emission, including radio synchrotron and gamma-ray emission, from the dense radiative shell; and the possible gravitational instability of a compressed clump.
Although observations of circumstellar shock interactions around supernovae are generally consistent with a 1/r**2 density profile wind surrounding the progenitor star, this is not true for GRB (gamma-ray burst) afterglows. However, GRB 991208 and GRB 000301C may be consistent with wind interaction if the injection particle spectrum is a broken power law. Circumstellar dust echos can place constraints on supernova and GRB progenitors, but have been clearly observed only around SN 1987A. Excess emission observed in two GRB afterglows is more likely to have a supernova origin. An interstellar dust echo, causing the light curve to flatten out, is a possibility for GRB afterglows, but is not likely to be observable.
We present a three dimensional radiative transfer model to examine the effects of resonance line scattering in the post-shock flow behind a non-radiative supernova remnant shock. For a rippled shock front viewed edge-on, line scattering significantly reduces the observed flux of CIV 1549 and NV 1240, two important diagnostic lines in the ultraviolet spectra of supernova remnants. The correction factor (defined to be the ratio of the line flux that would be observed neglecting scattering, to the actual observed line flux) is a function of position within the filament. For sufficiently large regions that include crisp edges as well as more diffuse regions of the filament structure, the CIV and NV correction factors are between about 1.5 and 3.5 (and the CIV correction factor is invariably larger than the NV correction factor). The correction factors have a larger range when smaller regions are considered. The CIV correction factor is about 6 at the filament edges, while the NV correction factor is about 4. These simulations of resonance line scattering will be useful for the analysis of supernova remnant shock spectra.
The type Ia supernova SN1998bu in M96 was observed by COMPTEL for a total of 88 days starting 17 days after the first detection of the supernova. The accumulated effective observation time was 4.14 Msec. The COMPTEL observations were performed in a special instrument mode improving the low-energy sensitivity. We generated images in the 847 keV and 1238 keV lines of 56Co, using improved point spread functions for the low-energy mode. We do not detect SN1998bu. A spectral analysis of our data also confirms the non-detection of the supernova. We discuss the event for which our upper limits constrain the standard supernova models.
The data of type Ia supernovae observed by the High-z SN Search Team and Supernova Cosmology Project are analyzed in inhomogeneous cosmological models with a local void on scales of about 200 Mpc, to derive the best-fit values of model parameters and the confidence contours. The $\chi^2$ fitting is found to be slightly better than that in homogeneous models. It is shown that (1) the best-fit values are most sensitive to the ratio $R$ of the outer Hubble constant ($H_0^{\rm II}$) to the inner Hubble constant ($H_0^{\rm I}$), (2) the best-fit outer density parameter ($\Omega_0^{\rm II}$) (and cosmological constant parameter ($\lambda_0^{\rm II}$)) increases (and decreases) with the increase of $R$, respectively, and (3) $(\Omega_0^{\rm II}, \lambda_0^{\rm II})$ can be $(1, 0)$ for $R \approx 0.8$. Moreover it is shown that these models may be naturally consistent with the new supernova data (SN1997ff) for $z = 1.7$.
We present radio maps of the historical supernova remnant G11.2-0.3 in the frequency range from 4.85 GHz to 32 GHz. The integrated spectrum with \alpha = -0.50 (S ~ \nu^\alpha) is dominated by its steep spectrum shell emission (\alpha ~ -0.57), although a flat spectrum core structure classifies G11.2-0.3 as a composite supernova remnant. A radial magnetic field structure is observed. An analysis of the multi-frequency polarization data results in highly varying rotation measures along the shell. The percentage polarization is rather low (~2%) and we conclude that G11.2-0.3 is in the transient phase from free to adiabatic expansion. The central flat spectrum component is partly resolved. A compact radio source with an inverted spectrum likely coincides with the previously detected X-ray pulsar (Torii et al. (1997). Two symmetric structures with flat radio spectra possibly indicate a bipolar outflow. Combining available X-ray and radio data we conclude that G11.2-0.3 is likely the remnant of a type II supernova explosion with an early type B progenitor star.
We propose a method to infer the initial spin period of pulsars residing in composite supernova remnants. Such a remnant consists of both a plerionic and a shell type component, corresponding respectively to the pulsar wind nebula driven by the spindown luminosity of the central pulsar, and the blastwave bounding the supernova remnant. Theoretical investigations including hydrodynamical simulations have shown that at late times (~ 1,000 - 10,000 years), a simple scaling law connects the radius of the supernova shell to the radius of the plerion. The energy content of the plerion and the total mechanical energy of the supernova remnant enter into this scaling law. One can use this scaling law to estimate the initial spin period of pulsars residing in composite remnants. We discuss potential pitfalls of this method, including the effect of a small remnant age and of strong radiative losses in the plerion.
Six x-ray point sources, with luminosities of $4 \times 10^{38} - 2 \times 10^{39} \rm ergs s^{-1}$ in the 0.4--7 keV band, were detected in Chandra observations of the spiral galaxy M100. One source is identified with supernova SN 1979C and appears to have roughly constant x-ray flux for the period 16--20 years after the outburst. The x-ray spectrum is soft, as would be expected if the x-ray emission is due to the interaction of supernova ejecta with circumstellar matter. Most of the other sources are variable either within the Chandra observation or when compared to archival data. None are coincident with the peak of the radio emission at the nucleus. These sources have harder spectra than the supernova and are likely x-ray binaries. M100 has more bright x-ray sources than typical for spiral galaxies of its size. This is likely related to active star formation occurring in the galaxy.
We show that a cooled region of shocked supernova ejecta forms in a type II supernova-QSO wind interaction, and has a density, an ionization parameter, and a column density compatible with those inferred for the high ionization component of the broad emission line regions in QSOs. The calculations are based on the assumption that the ejecta flow is described initially by a similarity solution investigated by Chevalier (1982) and Nadyozhin (1985) and is spherically symmetric. Heating and cooling appropriate for gas irradiated by a nearby powerful continuum source is included in our model, together with reasonable assumptions for the properties of the QSO wind. The model results are also in agreement with observational correlations and imply reasonable supernova rates.
The neutrino driven wind during a core collapse supernova is an attractive site for r-process nucleosynthesis. The electron fraction $Y_e$ in the wind depends on observable neutrino energies and luminosities. The mean antineutrino energy is limited by supernova SN1987A data while lepton number conservation constrains the ratio of antineutrino to neutrino luminosities. If $Y_e$, in the wind, is to be suitable for rapid neutron capture nucleosynthesis, then the mean electron neutrino energy may be significantly lower then that predicted in present supernova simulations, or there may be new neutrino physics such as oscillations to sterile neutrinos.
Neutron stars, just after their formation, are surrounded by expanding, dense, and very hot envelopes which radiate thermal photons. Iron nuclei can be accelerated in the wind zones of such energetic pulsars to very high energies. These nuclei photo-disintegrate and their products lose energy efficiently in collisions with thermal photons and with the matter of the envelope, mainly via pion production. When the temperature of the radiation inside the envelope of the supernova drops below $\sim 3\times 10^6$ K, these pions decay before losing energy and produce high energy neutrinos. We estimate the flux of muon neutrinos emitted during such an early phase of the pulsar - supernova envelope interaction. We find that a 1 km$^2$ neutrino detector should be able to detect neutrinos above 1 TeV within about one year after the explosion from a supernova in our Galaxy. This result holds if these pulsars are able to efficiently accelerate nuclei to energies $\sim 10^{20}$ eV, as postulated recently by some authors for models of Galactic acceleration of the extremely high energy cosmic rays (EHE CRs).
The origin of nucleosynthesis products of rapid neutron capture reactions (the r-process) is a longstanding astrophysical problem. Recent analyses of elemental abundances for extremely metal-poor stars shed light on the elemental abundances of individual supernovae. Comparison of the abundance distributions of some extremely metal-poor stars with those of the best-observed supernova SN 1987A clearly indicates that the overabundances of barium and strontium found in SN 1987A that have been ascribed to the slow neutron capture process must be results of r-process nucleosynthesis. The mass of freshly synthesized barium in SN 1987A is estimated to be 6x10^-6 solar mass based on the observed surface abundance and detailed hydrodynamical models for this supernova. These new findings lead to the conclusion that 20 solar mass stars, one of which is the progenitor star of SN 1987A, are the predominant production sites for r-process elements in the Galaxy and the r-process element donors for notable neutron-capture-rich giant stars, CS22892-052 and CS31082-001.
The EROS2 microlensing search will end at the end of 2002. Apart of this microlensing search, EROS has discovered ~70 supernovae during 8 periods partially dedicated to a SN search. In this document, we investigated a new way of using the EROS telescope (The MARLY) after this date, as a dedicated nearby supernovae photometer. The performance of a set-up with two cameras allowing to simultaneously perform BVRI and U photometry have been estimated. Each year, of order of 100 type Ia supernovae at z ~0.05 should be photometrically followed-up during 80 days with a precision of 2% in BVRI and ~3,5% in U.
While the modern stellar IMF shows a rapid decline with increasing mass, theoretical investigations suggest that very massive stars (>100 solar masses) may have been abundant in the early universe. Other calculations also indicate that, lacking metals, these same stars reach their late evolutionary stages without appreciable mass loss. After central helium burning, they encounter the electron-positron pair instability, collapse, and burn oxygen and silicon explosively. If sufficient energy is released by the burning, these stars explode as brilliant supernovae with energies up to 100 times that of an ordinary core collapse supernova. They also eject up to 50 solar masses of radioactive Ni56. Stars less massive than 140 solar masses or more massive than 260 solar masses should collapse into black holes instead of exploding, thus bounding the pair-creation supernovae with regions of stellar mass that are nucleosynthetically sterile. Pair-instability supernovae might be detectable in the near infrared out to redshifts of 20 or more and their ashes should leave a distinctive nucleosynthetic pattern.
We show that supernova neutrinos can be studied by observing their charged-current interactions with $^{100}$Mo, which has strong spin-isospin giant resonances. Information about both the effective temperature of the electron neutrino sphere and the oscillation into electron neutrinos of other flavors can be extracted from the electron (inverse $\beta$) spectrum. We use measured hadronic charge-exchange spectra and the Quasiparticle Random Phase Approximation to calculate the charged-current response of $^{100}$Mo to electron neutrinos from supernovae, with and without the assumption of oscillations. A scaled up version of the MOON detector for $\beta \beta$ and solar-neutrino studies could potentially be useful for spectroscopic studies of supernova neutrinos as well.
Scattering and absorption of light by a homogeneous distribution of intergalactic large dust grains has been proposed as an alternative, non-cosmological explanation for the faintness of Type Ia supernovae at $z\s im 0.5$. We investigate the differential extinction for high-redshift sources caused by extragalactic dust along the line of sight.   Future observations of Type Ia supernovae up to $z\sim 2$, e.g. by the proposed SNAP satellite, will allow the measurement of the properties of dust over cosmological distances. We show that 1% {\em relative} spectrophotometric accuracy (or broadband photometry) in the wavelength interval 0.7--1.5 $\mu$m is required to measure the extinction caused by ``grey'' dust down to $\delta m=0.02$ magnitudes.   We also argue that the presence of grey dust is not necessarily inconsistent with the recent measurement of the brightness of a supernova at $z=1.7$ (SN 1997ff), in the absence of accurate spectrophotometric information of the supernova.
The observation of SN 1997ff at redshift 1.7 has been claimed to refute alternative models such as grey dust or evolution for the faintness of distant supernovae, leaving only an accelerating Universe as a viable model. However, a very simple one parameter evolution model, with the peak luminosity varying as an exponential function of cosmic time, converts the flux vs. distance law of the critical density matter-dominated model into that of the concordance Omega_matter = 0.3 flat vacuum-dominated model with an error no larger than 0.03 mag over the range 0-2 in redshift. A grey dust model that matches this accuracy can easily be contrived but it still fails by overproducing the far-IR background or distorting the CMB. Models that involve oscillation between photons and axions could emulate an exponential function of cosmic time without violating these background constraints. Clearly a better and well-tested understanding of the Type Ia supernova explosion mechanism and the origin of the correlation between the decay rate and luminosity is needed before any effort to reduce statistical errors in the supernova Hubble diagram to very small levels.
We present evidence for a correlation between expansion velocities of the ejecta of Type II plateau supernovae and their bolometric luminosities during the plateau phase. This correlation permits one to standardize the candles and decrease the scatter in the Hubble diagram from ~1 mag to a level of 0.4 and 0.3 mag in the V and I bands, respectively. When we restrict the sample to the eight objects which are well in the Hubble flow (cz > 3,000 km/s) the scatter drops even further to only 0.2 mag (or 9% in distance), which is comparable to the precision yielded by Type Ia supernovae and far better than the ``expanding photosphere method'' applied to Type II supernovae. Using SN 1987A to calibrate the Hubble diagrams we get Ho=55+/-12.
Second Chandra observation of 1E 1207.4-5209, the central source of the supernova remnant PKS 1209-51/52, allowed us to confirm the previously detected period of 424 ms and, assuming a uniform spin-down, estimate the period derivative, Pdot (0.7-3)e-14 s/s. The corresponding characteristic age of the pulsar, P/2Pdot~200-900 kyr, is much larger than the estimated age of the SNR, \~7 kyr. The values of the spin-down luminosity, Edot (0.4-1.6)e34 erg/s, and conventional magnetic field, B (2-4)e12 G, are typical for a middle-aged radio pulsar, although no manifestations of pulsar activity have been observed. If 1E 1207.4-5209 is indeed the neutron star formed in the same supernova explosion that created PKS 1209-51/52, such a discrepancy in ages could be explained either by a long initial period, close to its current value, or, less likely, by a very large braking index of the pulsar. Alternatively, the pulsar could be a foreground object unrelated to the supernova remnant, but the probability of such a coincidence is very low.
Measurements of the flux and redshifts of Type Ia supernovae have provided persuasive evidence that the expansion of the universe is accelerating. If true, then in the context of standard FRW cosmology this suggests that the energy density of hte universe is dominated by "dark energy" -- a component with negative pressure of magnitude comparable to its energy density. To further investigate this phenomenon, more extensive surveys of supernovae are being planned. Given the likely timescales for completion, by the time data from these surveys are available some important cosmological parameters will be known to high precision from CMB measurements. Here we consider the impact of that foreknowledge on the design of supernova surveys. In particular we show that, despite greater opportunities to multiplex, purely from the point of view of statistical errors, a deep survey may not obviously be better than a shallow one.
We report the discovery of two supernovae (SN 1999gw and SN 2001db) obtained within the framework of an infrared monitoring campaign of Luminous Infrared Galaxies, aimed at detecting obscured supernovae. SN 2001db, extinguished by Av~5.5 mag, is the first supernova discovered in the infrared which has received the spectroscopic confirmation. This result highlights the power of infrared monitoring in detecting obscured SNe and indicates that optical surveys are probably missing a significant fraction of SNe, especially in obscured systems such as starburst galaxies. The preliminary estimate of SN rate in LIRG galaxies is about an order of magnitude higher than that expected from optical surveys.
Classifications on the DDO system are given for the host galaxies of 177 supernovae (SNe) that have been discovered since 1997 during the course of the Lick Observatory Supernova Search with the Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope. Whereas SNe Ia occur in all galaxy types, it is found, at a high level of statistical confidence, that SNe Ib, Ic, and II are strongly concentrated in late-type galaxies. However, attention is drawn to a possible exception provided by SN 2001I. This SN IIn occurred in the E2 galaxy UGC 2836, which was not expected to harbor a massive young supernova progenitor.
We suggest that the collapsing core of a massive rotating star may fragment to produce two or more compact objects. Their coalescence under gravitational radiation gives the resulting black hole or neutron star a significant kick velocity, which may explain those observed in pulsars. A gamma-ray burst can result only when this kick is small. Thus only a small fraction of core-collapse supernovae produce gamma-ray bursts. The burst may be delayed significantly (hours - days) after the supernova, as suggested by recent observations. If this picture is correct, core-collapse supernovae should be significant sources of gravitational radiation with a chirp signal similar to a coalescing binary.
Type Ia supernovae are an important tool for studying the expansion history of the universe. Advancing our yet incomplete understanding of the explosion scenario requires detailed and realistic numerical models in order to interpret and analyze the growing amount of observational data. Here we present first results of our new NLTE model calculations for the expanding atmospheres of type Ia supernovae that employ a detailed and consistent treatment of all important NLTE effects as well as line blocking and blanketing. The comparison of the synthetic spectra resulting from these models with observed data shows that the employed methods represent an important step towards a more realistic description of the atmospheres of supernovae Ia.
At late phases the powering of supernova light curves is often provided by the decay of radioactive elements synthesized in the explosions. This is unambiguously revealed when the light curve decline follows the half life time of the decaying elements, and the bolometric luminosity then directly provides the mass of ejected radioactive material. I will focus on the best observed element, Nickel-56, and demonstrate that different supernovae eject different amounts of this element. SN 1994W ejected very small amounts of nickel, possibly caused by black hole formation. SN 1998bw may instead have ejected more Nickel-56 than any other supernova to date.   I will also discuss our ISO non-detection of [Fe II] 26 micron in SN 1987A, which can be used to estimate an upper limit on the mass of ejected radioactive Titanium-44.
We report the serendipitous discovery of a supernova (SN) in the nearby radio-galaxy 3C 78. Observations obtained with the STIS spectrograph on board the Hubble Space Telescope show, at a distance of 0.54 arcsec (300 pc) from the galaxy nucleus, a second bright source, not present in previous images. As this source was fortuitously covered by the spectrograph slit its spectrum was obtained and it is characteristic of a Type Ia SN. This SN is closely aligned with the radio-jet of 3C 78. Analysis of historical records shows that such a close association between jet and supernova occurred in 6 of the 14 reported SNe in radio-galaxies. The probability that this results from a random distribution of SN in the host galaxy is less than 0.05%. We then argue that jets might trigger supernova explosions.
We present a Monte-Carlo package for simulation of high-redshift supernova data, SNOC. Optical and near-infrared photons from supernovae are ray-traced over cosmological distances from the simulated host galaxy to the observer at Earth. The distances to the sources are calculated from user provided cosmological parameters in a Friedmann-Lemaitre universe, allowing for arbitrary forms of ``dark energy''. The code takes into account gravitational interactions (lensing) and extinction by dust, both in the host galaxy and in the line-of-sight. The user can also choose to include exotic effects like a hypothetical attenuation due to photon-axion oscillations. SNOC is primarily useful for estimations of cosmological parameter uncertainties from studies of apparent brightness of Type Ia supernovae vs redshift, with special emphasis on potential systematic effects. It can also be used to compute standard cosmological quantities like luminosity distance, lookback time and age of the universe in any Friedmann-Lemaitre model with or without quintessence.
X-ray observations have shown that the chemical abundance in the starburst galaxy M82 is quite rich in Si and S compared with oxygen. Such an abundance pattern cannot be explained with any combination of conventional Type I and II supernova yields. Also the energy to heavy element mass ratio of the observed hot plasma is much higher than the value resulted from normal supernovae. We calculate explosive nucleosynthesis in core-collapse hypernovae and show that the abundance pattern and the large ratio between the energy and the heavy element mass can be explained with the hypernova nucleosynthesis. Such hypernova explosions are expected to occur for stars more massive than >~ 20-25 Msun, and likely dominating the starburst, because the age after the starburst in M82 is estimated to be as short as ~ 10^6 - 10^7 yr. We also investigate pair-instability supernovae (~ 150-300 Msun) and conclude that the energy to heavy element mass ratio in these supernovae is too small to explain the observation.
We propose a new approach for studying the neutron star/supernova remnant associations, based on the idea that the supernova remnants (SNRs) can be products of an off-centered supernova (SN) explosion in a preexisting bubble created by the wind of a moving massive star. A cavity SN explosion of a moving star results in a considerable offset of the neutron star (NS) birth-place from the geometrical center of the SNR. Therefore: a) the high transverse velocities inferred for a number of NSs through their association with SNRs can be reduced; b) the proper motion vector of a NS should not necessarily point away from the geometrical center of the associated SNR. Taking into account these two facts allow us to enlarge the circle of possible NS/SNR associations, and could significantly affect the results of previous studies of associations. The possibilities of our approach are illustrated with some examples. We also show that the concept of an off-centered cavity SN explosion could be used to explain the peculiar structures of a number of SNRs and for searches for stellar remnants possibly associated with them.
It is thought that Galactic cosmic ray (CR) nuclei are gradually accelerated to high energies (up to ~300 TeV/nucleon, where 1TeV=10^12eV) in the expanding shock-waves connected with the remnants of powerful supernova explosions. However, this conjecture has eluded direct observational confirmation^1,2 since it was first proposed in 1953 (ref. 3). Enomoto et al.^4 claim to have finally found definitive evidence that corroborates this model, proposing that the very-high-energy, TeV-range, gamma-rays from the supernova remnant (SNR) RX J1713.7-3946 are due to the interactions of energetic nuclei in this region. Here we argue that their claim is not supported by the existing multiwavelength spectrum of this source. The search for the origin(s) of Galactic cosmic ray nuclei may be closing in on the long-suspected supernova-remnant sources, but it is not yet over.
We review the status of the current quest to understand the mechanism of core-collapse supernovae, if neutrino-driven. In the process, we discuss the spherical explosion paradigm and its problems, some results from our new suite of collapse calculations performed using a recently-developed 1D implicit, multi-group, Feautrier/tangent-ray, Boltzmann solver coupled to explicit predictor/corrector hydrodynamics, the basic energetics of supernova explosions, and the promise of multi-D radiation/hydro simulations to explain why the cores of massive stars explode.
Supernovae play a large but poorly understood role in our attempts to explain the evolution of the baryonic universe. Numerous observations throughout astronomy cannot be explained if we neglect their influence, yet our quantitative understanding of the ways in which supernovae affect the universe remains remarkably poor. This is one of the most embarrassing gaps in our knowledge of the cosmos, and planned telescopes and surveys will probably not do much to fill it. The problem is that these surveys will be optimized to observe galaxies and intergalactic material independently of each other, while (in the author's view) by far the best information will come from simultaneous surveys of galaxies and the intergalactic material (IGM) in their vicinity. Only this will show directly how galaxies affect their surroundings and provide a rough energy scale for supernova-driven winds. Redshifts 1<z<3 are ideal for the joint galaxy/IGM surveys we advocate, because the comoving density of star formation is near its peak, because the Lyman-alpha forest is thin enough for QSO spectra to reveal the locations of the dominant metallic species, and because bright background QSOs are common. But a new UV-capable spectrograph in space will be required.
This paper provides a progress report on a collaborative program at the Las Campanas and Cerro Tololo Observatories to observe the near-IR light curves of Type Ia supernovae. We discuss how the morphologies of the JHK light curves change as a function of the decline rate. Evidence is presented which indicates that the absolute magnitudes in the H band have little or no dependence on the decline rate, suggesting that SNe Ia may be nearly perfect cosmological standard candles in the near-IR. A preliminary Hubble diagram in the H band is presented and compared with a similar diagram in V for the same objects. Finally, observations of two peculiar supernovae, 1999ac and 2001ay, are briefly discussed.
Numerical simulations of the interaction between supernova ejecta and a stellar wind are presented. We follow the temporal evolution of the shock fronts that are formed through such an interaction and determine the velocities, temperatures and densities. We model the X-ray emission from the SNR-stellar wind collision region and we compare it with recent results from X-ray observations carried out with the Chandra satellite of the SMC supernova remnant SNR 0057-7226 which could be interacting with the wind of the Wolf-Rayet system HD 5980. The simulations predict the presence of shell-like regions of enhanced X-ray emission which are consistent with the presence of X-ray emitting arcs in the Chandra image. Also the observed X-ray luminosity is comparable to the X-ray luminosities we obtain from the simulations for a supernova with an initial energy in the (1-5)E50 erg range.
An attempt to measure the Hubble constant with gravitational lens time delays is often limited by the strong degeneracy between radial mass profiles of lens galaxies and the Hubble constant. We show that strong gravitational lensing of type Ia supernovae breaks this degeneracy; the standard candle nature of type Ia supernova luminosity function allows one to measure the magnification factor directly, and this information is essential to constrain radial mass profiles and the Hubble constant separately. Our numerical simulation demonstrates that the Hubble constant can be determined with \sim 5% accuracy from only several lens events if magnification factors are used as constraints. Therefore, distant supernova survey is a promising way to measure the global Hubble constant independently with the local estimates.
Of the known pulsar wind nebulae, 8 are good candidates for being in the early stage of evolution where the wind nebula is interacting with the freely expanding supernova ejecta. Several of these have been identified with historical supernovae. Although the identification of SN 1181 with 3C 58 has been thought to be relatively secure, the large size of the nebula, the amount of swept up mass, and the internal energy indicate a larger age. For G11.2-0.3, the nebular size and internal energy are consistent with the identification with the possible supernova of 386. Although the Crab Nebula appears to have approximate energy equipartition between particles and the magnetic field, the nebulae 3C 58 and MSH 15-52 appear to be particle dominated. The low magnetic field is consistent with models in which the nebulae are created by a shocked pulsar wind.
One of the most dramatic possible consequences of stellar rotation is its influence on stellar death, particularly of massive stars. If the angular momentum of the iron core when it collapses is such as to produce a neutron star with a period of 5 ms or less, rotation will have important consequences for the supernova explosion mechanism. Still shorter periods, corresponding to a neutron star rotating at break up, are required for the progenitors of gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). Current stellar models, while providing an excess of angular momentum to pulsars, still fall short of what is needed to make GRBs. The possibility of slowing young neutron stars in ordinary supernovae by a combination of neutrino-powered winds and the propeller mechanism is discussed. The fall back of slowly moving ejecta during the first day of the supernova may be critical. GRBs, on the other hand, probably require stellar mergers for their production and perhaps less efficient mass loss and magnetic torques than estimated thus far.
High-velocity features in Type Ia supernova spectra provide a way to probe the outer layers of these explosions. The maximum-light spectra of the unique Type Ia supernova 2000cx exhibit interesting Ca II features with high-velocity components. The infrared triplet absorption is quadruply notched, while the H&K absorption is wide and flat. Stimulated by a three-dimensional interpretation of similar Ca II features in another Type Ia supernova (SN 2001el, Kasen et al. 2003), we present alternative spherically symmetric and three-dimensional ejecta models to fit the high-velocity (v > 16,000 km/s) Ca II features of SN 2000cx. We also present simple estimates of the high-velocity ejecta mass for a few trial compositions and discuss their implications for explosion modelling.
We report the results of an observation of a large diameter (110 pc) supernova remnant (SNR) found to encircle the position of the ultraluminous X-ray source (ULX) IC 342 X-1. The inferred initial energy input to the SNR is at least 2 -- 3 times greater than the canonical energy for an ``ordinary'' supernova remnant. Two regions on the inside of the shell are bright in [O III] lambda5007 emission, possibly as the result of X-ray photoionization by the ULX. If this is the case, then the morphology of this nebulosity implies that the X-ray emission from the ULX is anisotropic. The presence of the ULX, most probably a black hole X-ray binary, within an unusually energetic supernova remnant suggests that we may be observing the aftermath of a gamma-ray burst, though other origins for the energetic nebula are discussed.
We show that long-period dwarf novae offer a promising route for making Type Ia supernovae. For typical dwarf nova duty cycles d ~ 0.1 - 0.01, mass is accreted by the white dwarf mainly during dwarf nova outbursts at rates allowing steady nuclear burning of most of the accreted matter. Mass gains up to ~ 0.4 Msun are possible in this way. Although these are too small to allow a 0.7 Msun WD to reach the Chandrasekhar mass, they are sufficient if the WD grew to ~ 1 Msun in a previous episode of thermal-timescale mass transfer, i.e. for those long-period dwarf novae which descend from supersoft binaries. A further advantage of this picture is that the supernova always occurs in a binary of small secondary/primary mass ratio, with the secondary having very little remaining hydrogen. Both features greatly reduce the possibility of hydrogen contamination of the supernova ejecta.
We investigate the supernova explosions that end the lives of massive Population III stars in low-mass minihalos (M~10^6 M_sun) at redshifts z~20. Employing the smoothed particle hydrodynamics method, we carry out numerical simulations in a cosmological set-up of pair-instability supernovae with explosion energies of E_SN=10^51 and 10^53 ergs. We find that the more energetic explosion leads to the complete disruption of the gas in the minihalo, whereas the lower explosion energy leaves much of the halo intact. The higher energy supernova expels > 90% of the stellar metals into a region ~1 kpc across over a timescale of 3-5 Myr. Due to this burst-like initial star formation episode, a large fraction of the universe could have been endowed with a metallicity floor, Z_min>10^-4 Z_sun, already at z>15.
We show that the observed ratio of the subtypes Ib,c and II core-collapse supernovae depends on the metallicity of the host galaxy, as expected on theoretical grounds. However, the observed relation differs considerably from expectations based on non-rotating models of single stars with mass loss. We argue that the predictions of recent models with rotation offer a much better agreement with observations, at least for progenitor stars with solar metallicity; calculations of models with higher and lower metallicities are required in order to substantiate these conclusions. We also suggest that systematic surveys of core collapse supernovae up to redshift of 1 with the SNAP satellite would allow to probe the effect of metallicity on supernovae properties during the past history of the universe.
A new method to study the effects of neutrino masses on a supernova neutrino signal is proposed. The method relies exclusively on the analysis of the full statistics of neutrino events, it is independent of astrophysical assumptions, and does not require the observation of any additional phenomenon to trace possible delays in the neutrino arrival times. The sensitivity of the method to the sub-eV neutrino mass range, defined as the capability of disentangling at 95% c.l. the case $m_\nu=1$eV from $m_\nu=0$, is tested by analyzing a set of synthetic neutrino samples modeled according to the signal that could be detected at SuperKamiokande. For a supernova at the Galactic center success is achieved in more than 50% of the cases. It is argued that a future Galactic supernova yielding several thousands of inverse $\beta$ decays might provide enough information to explore a neutrino mass range somewhat below 1 eV.
I review recent optical observations of supernovae (SNe) conducted by my group. The Lick Observatory Supernova Search with the 0.76-m Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope is currently the world's most successful search for nearby SNe. We also use this telescope to obtain multicolor light curves of SNe. One of the more interesting SNe we discovered is SN 2000cx, which differs from all previously observed SNe Ia. Another very strange SN Ia that we studied is SN 2002cx, many of whose properties are opposite those of SN 2000cx. Extensive data on SNe II-P 1999em and 1999gi were used to derive distances with the expanding photosphere method. Results from spectropolarimetry suggest that the deeper we peer into the ejecta of core-collapse SNe, the greater the asphericity. We are using Hubble Space Telescope data to identify, or set limits on, the progenitors of core-collapse SNe.
Large amounts of dust have recently been discovered in high-z galaxies and QSOs. The stellar winds produced by AGB stars are thought to be the main source of dust in galaxies, but they cannot produce that dust on a short enough timescale (<1 Gyr) to explain the results in the high-z galaxies. Supernova explosions of massive stars (TypeII) are also a potential source, with models predicting 0.2-4 Msun of dust from each. As massive stars evolve rapidly, on timescales of a few Myr, these supernovae could be responsible for the high-z dust. Observations of supernova remnants in the Milky Way have previously only revealed 10^-7 - 10^-3 Msun of dust each, which is insufficient to explain the high-z data. Here we report the detection of ~2-4 Msun of cold dust in Cas A. This implies that supernovae are at least as important as stellar winds in producing dust in our Galaxy and would have been the dominant source of dust at high-z.
Since April 2000, a program using the ESO/VLT/UVES to search for early circumstellar signatures from nearby supernovae has been conducted. Until now, two Type Ia supernovae have been observed, SNe 2000cx and 2001el. Here we report on preliminary results for SNe 2001el, and we discuss how the observations can be used together with detailed modeling to derive an upper limit on the putative wind from the progenitor system. For a hydrogen-rich wind with velocity 10 km/s, the mass loss rate for the progenitor system of SN 2001el is less than 1O^{-5} solar masses per year.
The timescales to replenish dust from the cool, dense winds of Asymptotic Giant Branch stars are believed to be greater than the timescales for dust destruction. In high redshift galaxies, this problem is further compounded as the stars take longer than the age of the Universe to evolve into the dust production stages. To explain these discrepancies, dust formation in supernovae (SNe) is required to be an important process but until very recently dust in supernova remnants has only been detected in very small quantities. We present the first submillimeter observations of cold dust in Kepler's supernova remnant (SNR) using SCUBA. A two component dust temperature model is required to fit the Spectral Energy Distribution (SED) with $T_{warm} \sim 102$K and $T_{cold} \sim 17$K. The total mass of dust implied for Kepler is $\sim 1M_{\odot}$ - 1000 times greater than previous estimates. Thus SNe, or their progenitors may be important dust formation sites.
Long Chandra observations of 17 arcmin x 17 arcmin field in the Galactic Center (GC) region reported by Muno et. al. (2003) have revealed a population of about 2,000 hard faint X-ray sources limited by luminosities Lx > 10(31} erg/s. We show that fast moving knots (FMKs) of supernovae ejecta could comprise a sizeable fraction of the sources. Each supernova event can produce hundreds of FMKs. The presence of ~ 3 supernova remnants of age ~ 1,000 years in the GC region could provide the required number of the FMKs. Simulated X-ray spectra of the FMKs contain both thermal and nonthermal components. The nonthermal spectra are power-laws with hard photon indexes 0 < Gamma < 1.5 and prominent lines of some metals (e.g. Fe). The logN-logS distribution and the hardness ratios of the FMKs in the GC region are consistent with the Chandra findings. Spatial distribution of the FMKs in the GC region should appear as an ensemble of coherent shell and jet-like structures of a few arcmin-scale.
Supernova 2001ig in NGC 7424 has been observed with the Australia Telescope Compact Array at ~2 week intervals since its discovery, making this the best-studied Type IIb radio supernova since SN 1993J. We present radio light curves for frequencies from 1.4 to 20 GHz, and preliminary attempts to model the observed behaviour. Since peaking in radio luminosity at 8.6 and 4.8 GHz some 1-2 months after the explosion, SN 2001ig has on at least two occasions deviated significantly from a smooth decline, indicative of interaction with a dense circumstellar medium and possibly of periodic progenitor mass-loss.
The association of a supernova with a gamma-ray burst (GRB 030329) implies a massive star progenitor, which is expected to have an environment formed by pre-burst stellar winds. Although some sources are consistent with the expected wind environment, many are not, being better fit by a uniform density environment. One possibility is that this is a shocked wind, close to the burst because of a high interstellar pressure and a low mass loss density. Alternatively, there is more than one kind of burst progenitor, some of which interact directly with the interstellar medium. Another proposed environment is a pulsar wind bubble that has expanded inside a supernova, which requires that the supernova precede the burst.
We present the results of a systematic analysis of a group of Type II plateau supernovae that span a large range in luminosities, from faint objects like SN 1997D and 1999br to very luminous events like SN 1992am. The physical properties of the supernovae appear to be related to the plateau luminosity or the expansion velocity. The simultaneous analysis of the observed light curves, line velocities and continuum temperatures leads us to robust estimates of the physical parameters of the ejected envelope. We find strong correlations among several parameters. The implications of these results regarding the nature of the progenitor, the central remnant and the Ni yield are also addressed.
A handful of nearby supernovae (SNe) with visual extinctions of a few magnitudes have recently been discovered. However, an undiscovered population of much more highly extinguished (A(V) > 10) core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) is likely to exist in the nuclear (central kpc) regions of starburst galaxies. The high dust extinction means that optical searches for such SNe are unlikely to be successful. Here, we present preliminary results from our ongoing near-infrared Ks-band search programme for nuclear SNe in nearby starburst galaxies. We also discuss searches for SNe in Luminous and Ultraluminous Infrared Galaxies.
We review the existing set of optical/UV/IR observations of Supernova 1993J, concentrating heavily on optical data because these are by far the most plentiful. Some results from theoretical modeling of the observations are also discussed. SN 1993J has provided the best observational evidence for the transformation of a SN from one spectral type to another, thereby providing a link between Type II and Type Ib supernovae (SNe). This has strengthened the argument that SNe Ib (and, by extension, SNe Ic) are core-collapse events. SN 1993J has remained relatively bright for 10 years; its late-time emission comes from the collision of supernova ejecta with circumstellar gas that was released by the progenitor prior to the explosion. The circumstellar material shows strong evidence of CNO processing.
We compare recent observations of the supernova remnant G11.2-0.3 taken with the VLA during 2001-02 with images from VLA archives (1984-85) to detect and measure the amount of expansion that has occurred during 17 years. The bright, circular outer shell shows a mean expansion of (0.71 +/- 0.15)% and (0.50 +/- 0.17)%, from 20- and 6-cm data, respectively, which corresponds to a rate of 0.057' +/- 0.012'/yr at 20 cm and 0.040' +/- 0.013'/yr at 6 cm. From this result, we estimate the age of the remnant to be roughly between 960 and 3400 years old, according to theoretical models of supernova evolution. This is highly inconsistent with the 24000 yr characteristic age of PSR J1811-1925, located at the remnant's center, but, rather, is consistent with the time since the historical supernova observed in 386 AD. We also predict that G11.2-0.3 is currently in a pre-Sedov evolutionary state, and set constraints on the distance to the remnant based on Chandra X-ray spectral results.
Radio and X-ray studies of young supernovae probe the interaction between the supernova shock waves and the surrounding medium and give clues to the nature and past of the progenitor star. Here we discuss the early emission from type Ic SN 2002ap and argue that repeated Compton boosting of optical photons by hot electrons presents the most natural explanation of the prompt X-ray emission. We describe the radio spectrum of another type Ic SN 2003dh (GRB030329) obtained with combined GMRT and VLA data. We report on the low frequency radio monitoring of SN 1995N and our objectives of distinguishing between competing models of X-ray emission from this SN and the nature of its progenitor by X-ray spectroscopy. Radio studies on SN 2001gd, SN 2001ig and SN 2002hh are mentioned.
We have applied the SRIM computer code to study the sputtering of some likely astrophysical grain materials, and we have shown that selective embedding of metallic projectiles offers a partial explanation of gas-phase depletions. We show that supernova shockwaves sweep a significantly larger mass of interstellar gas per unit time than the shockwaves generated by outflows in star-forming regions. We apply our sputtering model to the bombardment levels expected in a supernova shock, and show that net embedding may dominate over net sputtering, leading to grain growth under some circumstances, particularly when the bombarding gas is enriched with metals from the supernova progenitor star. A combination of short cooling times and net embedding mean that it is possible for a type II supernova to generate more dust that it destroys, and we conclude that, in general, the sputtering process often leads to a compositional change in the grain material rather than simply to grain erosion.
We present calculations of the radio images and light curves from supernovae, based on high-resolution numerical simulations of the hydrodynamics and radiation transfer in a spherically symmetric medium. As a specific example we model the emission from SN1993J. This supernova does not appear to be expanding in a self-similar fashion, and cannot be adequately fitted with the often-used analytic mini-shell model. We present a good fit to the radio evolution at a single frequency. Both free-free absorption and synchrotron self-absorption are needed to fit the light curve at early times, and a circumstellar density profile of $\rho \sim r ^{-1.7}$ provides the best fit to the later data. Comparisons of VLBI images of SN1993J with synthetic model images suggest that internal free-free absorption completely obscures emission at 8.4 GHz passing through the center of the supernova for the first few tens of years after explosion.
We calculate the ion-ion correlation effect on the neutrino-nucleus scattering in supernova cores, which is an important opacity source for the neutrinos and plays a vital role in the supernova explosion. In order to calculate the ion-ion correlation effect we use the results of the improved hypernetted-chain method calculations of the classical one-component plasma. As in the preceding studies on this effect, we find a dramatic decrease of the effective neutrino-nucleus scattering cross section for relatively low energy neutrinos with E < 20MeV. As a matter of fact, our calculation shows a much more dramatic reduction of the effective neutrino-nucleus scattering cross section for the low energy neutrinos with E < 10MeV than the results of Horowitz. Therefore, the ion-ion correlation effect will be more important than has hitherto been recognized. We present an accurate analytic fitting formula that summarizes our numerical results. This fitting formula will facilitate the application of the present results to the supernova explosion simulations.
The high resolution obtained through the use of VLBI gives an unique opportunity to directly observe the interaction of an expanding radio supernova with its surrounding medium. We present here results from our VLBI observations of the young supernovae SN 1979C, SN 1986J, and SN 2001gd.
Optical and infrared monitoring of the afterglow site of gamma-ray burst (GRB) 031203 has revealed a brightening source embedded in the host galaxy, which we attribute to the presence of a supernova (SN) related to the GRB ("SN 031203"). We present details of the discovery and evolution of SN 031203 from 0.2 to 92 days after the GRB, derived from SMARTS consortium photometry in I and J bands. A template type Ic lightcurve, constructed from SN 1998bw photometry, is consistent with the peak brightness of SN 031203 although the lightcurves are not identical. Differential astrometry reveals that the SN, and hence the GRB, occurred less than 300 h_71^-1 pc (3-sigma) from the apparent galaxy center. The peak of the supernova is brighter than the optical afterglow suggesting that this source is intermediate between a strong GRB and a supernova.
From both photometric and broadband spectral monitoring of gamma-ray burst (GRB) lightcurve ``bumps,'' particularly in GRB 011121, a strong case grew for a supernova (SN) origin. The GRB-SN connection was finally solidified beyond a reasonable doubt with the discovery that the bump in GRB 030329 was spectroscopically similar to a bright Type Ic SN. In light of this result, I redress the previous SN bump claims and conclude that 1) the distribution of GRB-SN bump peak magnitudes is consistent with the local Type Ibc SNe peak distribution and suggest that 2) the late-time bumps in all long-duration GRBs are likely supernovae.
Type Ia supernova data have recently become strong enough to enable, for the first time, constraints on the time variation of the dark energy density and its equation of state. Most analyses, however, are using simple two or three-parameter descriptions of the dark energy evolution, since it is well known that allowing more degrees of freedom introduces serious degeneracies. Here we present a method to produce uncorrelated and nearly model-independent band power estimates of the equation of state of dark energy and its density as a function of redshift. We apply the method to recently compiled supernova data. Our results are consistent with the cosmological constant scenario, in agreement with other analyses that use traditional parameterizations, though we find marginal (2-sigma) evidence for w(z) < -1 at z < 0.2. In addition to easy interpretation, uncorrelated, localized band powers allow intuitive and powerful testing of the constancy of either the energy density or equation of state. While we have used relatively coarse redshift binning suitable for the current set of about 150 supernovae, this approach should reach its full potential in the future, when applied to thousands of supernovae found from ground and space, combined with complementary information from other cosmological probes.
We discuss observational constrains coming from supernovae Ia imposed on the behaviour of the Randall-Sundrum models. In the case of dust matter on the brane, the difference between the best-fit Perlmutter model with a $\Lambda$-term and the best-fit brane models becomes detectable for redshifts $z > 1.2$. It is interesting that brane models predict brighter galaxies for such redshifts which is in agreement with the measurement of the $z = 1.7$ supernova. We also demonstrate that the fit to supernovae data can also be obtained, if we admit the "super-negative" dark energy (phantom matter) $p= - (4/3) \varrho$ on the brane, where the dark energy in a way mimics the influence of the cosmological constant. It also appears that the dark energy enlarges the age of the universe which is demanded in cosmology. Finally, we propose to check for dark radiation and brane tension by the application of the angular diameter of galaxies minimum value test. We point out the existence of coincidence problem for the brane tension parameter.
The propagation of cellularly stabilized thermonuclear flames is investigated by means of numerical simulations. In Type Ia supernova explosions the corresponding burning regime establishes at scales below the Gibson length. The cellular flame stabilization - which is a result of an interplay between the Landau-Darrieus instability and a nonlinear stabilization mechanism - is studied for the case of propagation into quiescent fuel as well as interaction with vortical fuel flows. Our simulations indicate that in thermonuclear supernova explosions stable cellular flames develop around the Gibson scale and that deflagration-to-detonation transition is unlikely to be triggered from flame evolution effects here.
The physics of the supernova may provide a clue of the cosmological dark matter. In the absence of new physics, the supernova calculations do not explain the observed velocities of pulsars. However, if there exists a singlet fermion with mass in the 1-20 keV range and a small mixing with neutrinos, this particle could be emitted asymmetrically from a cooling neutron star in the event of a supernova explosion. The asymmetry could explain the long-standing puzzle of pulsar velocities. The same particle could be the dark matter. Observations of X-ray telescopes, as well as a future detection of gravitational waves from a nearby supernova can confirm or rule out this possibility.
As part of an on-going radio supernova monitoring program, we have discovered a variable, compact steep spectrum radio source ~65 arcsec (~4 kpc) from the centre of the starburst galaxy NGC 3310. If the source is at the distance of NGC 3310, then its 5 GHz luminosity is ~3 x 10^{19} WHz^-1. The source luminosity, together with its variability characteristics, compact structure (<17 mas) and its association with a group of HII regions, leads us to propose that it is a previously uncatalogued type II radio supernova. A search of archival data also shows an associated X-ray source with a luminosity similar to known radio supernova.
We present maps of the nature of single star progenitors of supernovae and their remnants in mass and metallicity space. We find our results are similar to others but we have gone further in varying the amount of mixing and using various mass-loss schemes to see how the maps change. We find that extra-mixing, in the form of convective overshooting, moves boundaries such as the minimum mass for a supernova or WR star to lower masses. We also find that the pre-WR mass-loss determines the shape of our maps. We find that different mass-loss rates lead to quite different results. We find that the rise in luminosity at 2nd dredge-up places quite tight constraints on the masses of some progenitors and in particular the progenitor of supernova 2003gd.
In this paper we briefly comment on the observational status of the possible physical association between unidentified EGRET sources and supernova remnants (SNRs) in our Galaxy. We draw upon recent results presented in the review by Torres et al. (Physics Reports, 2003), concerning molecular gas in the vicinity of all 19 SNRs found to be positionally coincident with EGRET sources at low Galactic latitudes. In addition, we present new results regarding the supernova remnant CTA~1. Our findings disfavor the possibility of a physical connection with the nearby (in projection) EGRET source. There remains possible, however, that the compact object produced in the supernova explosion be related with the observed $\gamma$-ray flux.
In this paper we discuss the possibility to measure the Hubble parameter and the slope of galaxy density profiles using future supernova data. With future supernova surveys such as SNAP, large numbers of core collapse supernovae will be discovered, a small fraction of which will be multiply imaged. Measurements of the image separation, flux-ratio, time-delay and lensing foreground galaxy for these systems will provide tight constraints on the slope of galactic halos as well as providing complementary and independent information to other cosmological tests with respect to the Hubble parameter.
Subject of this contribution is to demonstrate that the observed faintness of the supernovae at the high redshift can be considered as a manifestation of quantum effects at cosmological scales. We show that observed redshift distribution of coordinate distances to the type Ia supernovae can be explained by the local manifestations of quantum fluctuations of the cosmological scale factor about its average value. These fluctuations can arise in the early universe, grow with time, and produce observed accelerating or decelerating expansions of space subdomains containing separate supernovae with high redshift whereas the universe as a whole expands at a steady rate.
A fraction of core collapse supernovae of type Ib/c are associated with Gamma-ray bursts, which are thought to produce highly relativistic jets. Recently, it has been hypothesized that a larger fraction of core collapse supernovae produce slower jets, which may contribute to the disruption and ejection of the supernova envelope, and explain the unusually energetic hypernovae. We explore the TeV neutrino signatures expected from such slower jets, and calculate the expected detection rates with upcoming Gigaton Cherenkov experiments. We conclude that individual jetted SNe may be detectable from nearby galaxies.
The time-dependent nonlinear kinetic theory for cosmic ray (CR) acceleration in supernova remnants (SNRs) is applied studying the properties of the synchrotron emission from SNRs, in particular, the surface brightness-diameter ($\Sigma-D$) relation. Detailed numerical calculations are performed for the expected range of the relevant physical parameters, namely the ambient density and the supernova explosion energy. The magnetic field in SNRs is assumed to be significantly amplified by the efficiently accelerating nuclear CR component. Due to the growing number of accelerated CRs the expected SNR luminosity increases during the free expansion phase, reaches a peak value at the beginning of the Sedov phase and then decreases again, since in this stage the overall CR number remains nearly constant, whereas the effective magnetic field diminishes with time. The theoretically predicted brightness-diameter relation in the radio range in the Sedov phase is close to $\Sigma_\mathrm{R}\propto D^{-17/4}$. It fits the observational data in a very satisfactory way. The observed spread of $\Sigma_\mathrm{R}$ at a given SNR size $D$ is the result of the spread of supernova explosion energies and interstellar medium densities.
We compare parameters of well-observed type II SN1999em derived by M.Hamuy and D.Nadyozhin based on Litvinova-Nadyozhin (1985) analytic fits with those found from the simulations with our radiative hydro code Stella. The difference of SN parameters is quite large for the long distance scale. The same code applied to models of SN1993J allows us to estimate systematic errors of extracting foreground extinction toward SN1993J suggested by Clocchiatti et al. (1995). A new implicit two-temperature hydro code code Supremna is introduced which self-consistently takes into account the kinetics of ionization, electron thermal conduction, and radiative losses for predicting X-ray spectra of young supernova remnants such as Tycho and Kepler.
We briefly review the young field of spectropolarimetry of core-collapse supernovae (SNe). Spectropolarimetry provides the only direct known probe of early-time supernova (SN) geometry. The fundamental result is that asphericity is a ubiquitous feature of young core-collapse SNe. However, the nature and degree of the asphericity vary considerably. The best predictor of core-collapse SN polarization seems to be the mass of the hydrogen envelope that is intact at the time of the explosion: those SNe that arise from progenitors with large, intact envelopes (e.g., Type II-plateau) have very low polarization, while those that result from progenitors that have lost part (SN IIb, SN IIn) or all (SN Ib) of their hydrogen (or even helium; SN Ic) layers prior to the explosion tend to show substantial polarization. Thus, the deeper we probe into core-collapse events, the greater the asphericity seems to be, suggesting a fundamentally asymmetric explosion with the asymmetry damped by the addition of envelope material.
RX J0852.0-4622 is a shell type supernova remnant with a power law spectrum in the south-eastern corner of the Vela supernova remnant. We report XMM-Newton observations of three fields centered on the rim of the remnant and confirm the power law shape of the spectra with no prominent emission lines as previously obtained with ASCA. The emission line feature at ~4.1 keV indicated in the ASCA/SIS spectrum of the northern field is detected and found in the southern and western fields, as well, with a total significance of slightly more than 4 sigmas. The line position is improved and the feature is centered on 4.45 +/- 0.05 keV. We suggest this line feature to be emission from Ti and Sc. The measured X-ray flux is consistent with the Ti gamma-ray flux previously measured with COMPTEL. We discuss various physical processes which may lead to the creation of these lines, and we discuss the implications for the progenitor and the supernova type.
Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) currently provide the most direct evidence for an accelerating Universe and for the existence of an unknown "dark energy" driving this expansion. The 5-year Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS; http://cfht.hawaii.edu/SNLS/) will deliver ~1000 SN Ia detections with well-sampled g'r'i'z' light curves. Using this definitive dataset, we will obtain a precise measurement of the cosmological parameters (Omega_m, Omega_lambda); our goal is to determine the cosmological equation of state parameter "w" to a statistical precision of +/-0.07, testing theories for the origin of the universal acceleration. In this proceeding, we summarise the progress made during the first full year of the survey operation.
A significant fraction of the energy density of the interstellar medium is in the form of high-energy charged particles (cosmic rays). The origin of these particles remains uncertain. Although it is generally accepted that the only sources capable of supplying the energy required to accelerate the bulk of Galactic cosmic rays are supernova explosions, and even though the mechanism of particle acceleration in expanding supernova remnant (SNR) shocks is thought to be well understood theoretically, unequivocal evidence for the production of high-energy particles in supernova shells has proven remarkably hard to find. Here we report on observations of the SNR RX J1713.7-3946 (G347.3-0.5), which was discovered by ROSAT in the X-ray spectrum and later claimed as a source of high-energy \gamma-rays of TeV energies (1 TeV=10^{12} eV). We present a TeV \gamma-ray image of the SNR: the spatially resolved remnant has a shell morphology similar to that seen in X-rays, which demonstrates that very-high-energy particles are accelerated there. The energy spectrum indicates efficient acceleration of charged particles to energies beyond 100 TeV, consistent with current ideas of particle acceleration in young SNR shocks.
We present a new set of stellar yields obtained from rotating stellar models at solar metallicity covering the massive star range (9-120 solar masses). The stellar models were calculated with the latest version of the Geneva stellar evolution code described in Hirschi et al 2004a. The contributions from stellar winds and from supernova explosions to the stellar yields were calculated separately. The two contributions were then added to compute the total stellar yields (Hirschi et al 2004b).   The effects of rotation on pre-supernova models are significant between 15 and 30 solar masses. Above 20 solar masses, rotation may change the radius or colour of the supernova progenitors (blue instead of red supergiant) and the supernova type (IIb or Ib instead of II). Rotation increases the helium and CO core sizes by a factor about 1.5. Thus, rotation increases the total metallic yields and in particular the yields for carbon and oxygen by a factor 1.5-2.5.   For Wolf-Rayet stars (M>30 solar masses), rotation increases the yields of helium and other hydrogen burning products but does not significantly affect the yields of heavy elements.
A large amount (about three solar masses) of cold (18 K) dust in the prototypical type II supernova remnant Cassiopeia A was recently reported. It was concluded that dust production in type II supernovae can explain how the large quantities (10^8 solar masses) of dust observed in the most distant quasars could have been produced within only 700 million years after the Big Bang. Foreground clouds of interstellar material, however, complicate the interpretation of the earlier submillimetre observations of Cas A. Here we report far-infrared and molecular line observations that demonstrate that most of the detected submillimetre emission originates from interstellar dust in a molecular cloud complex located in the line of sight between the Earth and Cas A, and is therefore not associated with the remnant. The argument that type II supernovae produce copious amounts of dust is not supported by the case of Cas A, which previously appeared to provide the best evidence for this possibility.
We study the effect of environment on the properties of type Ia supernovae by analyzing the integrated spectra of 57 host galaxies. Integrated spectra of galaxies best represent the global properties of the host and can be used to directly compare with spectra of high-redshift galaxies. From the spectra we deduce the metallicity, current star-formation rate and star-formation history of the hosts and compare these to the supernova decline rate which is an indicator of the luminosity. Our results show no significant correlation between spiral host galaxy metallicity and SNIa light curve decline rate. The Hydrogen-alpha equivalent width (EW) of the host galaxy is an indicator the current star-formation rate compared to average rate in the past. The range of SNIa luminosities increases with decreasing EW which suggests that the variation in SNIa {56}Ni production is primarily due to progenitor mass and population age.
We discuss the expansion velocities of different elements in the ejecta of the intermediate-z SNe Ia discovered as a part of the International Time Programme (ITP) project ``Omega and Lambda from Supernovae and the Physics of   Supernova Explosions'' at the European Northern Observatory (ENO). The expansion velocities measured for each normal SNIa are found to be within the typical velocity dispersion for their epoch. Meanwhile, the subluminous SN 2002lk SiII expansion velocity is significantly higher than that of SN 1991bg shortly after maximum. The observed phase was younger in SN2002lk than in the local subluminous SNIa SN1991bg.
Supernova 2004dj in the nearby spiral galaxy NGC2403 was detected optically in July 2004. Peaking at a magnitude of 11.2, this is the brightest supernova detected for several years. Here we present Multi-Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network (MERLIN) observations of this source, made over a four month period, which give a position of R.A. = 07h37m17.044s, Dec =+65deg35'57.84" (J2000.0). We also present a well-sampled 5 GHz light curve covering the period from 5 August to 2 December 2004. With the exception of the unusual and very close SN 1987A, these observations represent the first detailed radio light curve for the prompt emission from a Type II-P supernova.
We present an extensive set of optical spectroscopy of the nearby type Ia supernova, SN 2002er, with 24 epochs spanning -11 to +34 days. Its spectral evolution is fairly typical of a type Ia supernova although it suffers high extinction. Nevertheless, there are differences in the spectral evolution when compared to coeval spectra of other normal type Ia supernova with comparable decline-rate parameters. Modelling of the photospheric phase spectra using a homogeneous abundance distribution in the atmosphere provides a fair match to the observations, but only by pushing the adopted distance and risetime close to the observational limits. Future improvements here will require models with a more realtistic stratified abundance distribution. From simple modelling of a nebular spectrum obtained at +215d, we infer a 56Ni mass of 0.69Msun, consistent with that derived from the light curve.
We use a series of ray-tracing experiments to determine the magnification distribution of high-redshift sources by gravitational lensing. We determine empirically the relation between magnification and redshift, for various cosmological models. We then use this relation to estimate the effect of lensing on the determination of the cosmological parameters from observations of high-z supernovae. We found that, for supernovae at redshifts z<1.8, the effect of lensing is negligible compared to the intrinsic uncertainty in the measurements. Using mock data in the range 1.8<z<8, we show that the effect of lensing can become significant. Hence, if a population of very-high-z supernovae was ever discovered, it would be crucial to fully understand the effect of lensing, before these SNe could be used to constrain cosmological models.
Most supernovae are expected to explode in low-density hot media, particularly in galactic bulges and elliptical galaxies. The remnants of such supernovae, though difficult to detect individually, can be profoundly important in heating the media on large scales. We characterize the evolution of this kind of supernova remnants, based on analytical approximations and hydrodynamic simulations. We generalize the standard Sedov solution to account for both temperature and density effects of the ambient media. Although cooling can be neglected, the expansion of such a remnant deviates quickly from the standard Sedov solution and asymptotically approaches the ambient sound speed as the swept-up thermal energy becomes important. The relatively steady and fast expansion of the remnants over large volumes provides an ideal mechanism for spatially distributed heating, which may help to alleviate the over-cooling problem of hot gas in groups and clusters of galaxies as well as in galaxies themselves. The simulations were performed with the FLASH code.
We have used FORS1 at the ESO VLT to search for light echoes in imaging polarimetry from four historical supernovae in the face-on nearby spiral galaxy M83 (NGC 5236). No echoes were detected around our targets (SN 1923A, SN 1945B, SN 1950B and SN 1957D). This implies that the interstellar medium in their environs is rather tenuous (a few particles/cm^3), possibly as a result of previous supernova explosions that could have cleared the immediate vicinities of our targets. The merits and limitations of searching for light echoes in imaging polarimetry are discussed. From the photometry of the sources detected at the supernova locations, we estimate star cluster masses of 720, 400, 300 Mo for the cluster progenitors of SN 1957D, SN 1923A, and SN 1950B, respectively, and an upper limit of few tens of solar masses for SN 1945B.
Type Ic supernovae, the explosions following the core collapse of massive stars that have previously lost their hydrogen and helium envelopes, are particularly interesting because of the link with long-duration gamma-ray bursts. Although indications exist that these explosions are aspherical, direct evidence has still been missing. Late-time observations of SN 2003jd, a luminous Type Ic supernova, provide such evidence. Recent Subaru and Keck spectra reveal double-peaked profiles in the nebular lines of neutral oxygen and magnesium. These profiles are different from those of known Type Ic supernovae, with or without a gamma-ray burst, and they can be understood if SN 2003jd was an aspherical, axisymmetric explosion viewed from near the equatorial plane. If SN 2003jd was associated with a gamma-ray burst, we missed the burst as it was pointing away from us.
This paper is firstly intended to review shortly the most recent developments and ideas resulting from the necessity of having a scale at which gravitation to unify the other fundamental forces. With the declared intention of predicting an {\it in situ} distinct possibility for Kaluza-Klein gravitons formation in the supernova shell we are using state of the art simulations \citep{langer,ud1,ud2,ud3} for massive stellar winds to infer that the supernova shock which will hit such winds will meet a non-isotropic and non-homogeneous matter distribution with a very distinct geometry. By linking this to the mechanism of particle shock acceleration at cosmic ray energies (Fermi acceleration) and the related spallation in the wind shell, the result is the creation of proper conditions for Kaluza-Klein gravitons formation in the supernova shell from neutrino secondary particles (cosmic ray spallation products) interacting with $\sim 10^{18}$ eV cosmic rays.
We present the first detailed simulation of the interaction between the supernova explosion that produced Sgr A East and the wind-swept inner ~ 2-pc region at the Galactic center. The passage of the supernova ejecta through this medium produces an X-ray ridge ~ 9'' to 15'' to the NE of the supermassive black hole Sagittarius A* (Sgr A*). We show that the morphology and X-ray intensity of this feature match very well with recently obtained Chandra images, and we infer a supernova remnant age of less than 2,000 years. This young age--a factor 3--4 lower than previous estimates--arises from our inclusion of stellar wind effects in the initial (pre-explosion) conditions in the medium. The supernova does not clear out the central ~ 0.2-pc region around Sgr~A* and does not significantly alter the accretion rate onto the central black hole upon passage through the Galactic center.
Collisionless shocks play a role in many astrophysical phenomena, from coronal mass ejections (CMEs) in the heliosphere to supernova remnants. Their role in heating and accelerating particles is well accepted yet the exact mechanism for ion heating is not well understood. Two systems, CMEs and supernova remnants, were examined to determine the heating of heavy ions as they pass through collisionless shocks thus providing a seed population for cosmic ray acceleration processes. Three parameters are examined, the plasma beta, the Mach number of the shock and the magnetic angle of the shock. CMEs heat heavy ions preferentially. This is in contrast to the supernova data which shows less than mass proportional heating. In addition to these studies, heating in astrophysical systems involves neutral atoms. A Monte Carlo model simulated neutral particles as they pass through the shock. Neutrals can create a precursor to the shock additionally heating the plasma. This work uses in situ data from the heliosphere to study astronomical systems because of common shock properties is a unique way to study magnetic components of shocks remotely.
We present the results of an ongoing project to use the X-ray observations of Type Ia Supernova Remnants to constrain the physical processes involved in Type Ia Supernova explosions. We use the Tycho Supernova Remnant (SN 1572) as a benchmark case, comparing its observed spectrum with models for the X-ray emission from the shocked ejecta generated from different kinds of Type Ia explosions. Both the integrated spectrum of Tycho and the spatial distribution of the Fe and Si emission in the remnant are well reproduced by delayed detonation models with stratified ejecta. All the other Type Ia explosion models fail, including well-mixed deflagrations calculated in three dimensions.
We present a new method to parameterize Type Ia Supernovae (SN Ia) multi-color light curves. The method was developed in order to analyze the large number of SN Ia multi-color light curves measured in current high-redshift projects. The technique is based on empirically modeling SN Ia luminosity variations as a function of phase, wavelength, a shape parameter, and a color parameter. The model is trained with a sample of well measured nearby SN Ia and then tested with an independent set of supernovae by building an optimal luminosity distance estimator combining the supernova rest-frame luminosity, shape parameter and color reconstructed with the model. The distances we measure using B- and V-band data show a dispersion around the Hubble line comparable or lower than obtained with other methods. With this model, we are able to measure distances using U- and B-band data with a dispersion around the Hubble line of 0.16 +- 0.05.
Understanding the explosion mechanism of core collapse supernovae is a problem that has plagued nuclear astrophysicists since the first computational models of this phenomenon were carried out in the 1960s. Our current theories of this violent phenomenon center around multi-dimensional effects involving radiation-hydrodynamic flows of hot, dense matter and neutrinos. Modeling these multi-dimensional radiative flows presents a computational challenge that will continue to stress high-performance computing beyond the teraflop to the petaflop level. In this paper we describe a few of the scientific discoveries that we have made via terascale computational simulations of supernovae under the auspices of the SciDAC-funded Terascale Supernova Initiative.
We have analyzed the magnetic effects that may occur in rapidly rotating core collapse supernovae. We consider effects from both magnetic turbulence and the formation of magnetic bubbles. For magnetic turbulence we have made a perturbative analysis for our spherically symmetric core-collapse supernova model that incorporates the build up of magnetic field energy in the matter accreting onto the proto-neutron star shortly after collapse and bounce. This significantly modifies the pressure profile and increases the heating of the material above the proto-neutron star resulting in an explosion even in rotating stars that would not explode otherwise. Regarding magnetic bubbles we show that a model with a modest initial uniform magnetic field and uniform angular velocity of ~0.1 rad/s can form magnetic bubbles due to the very non homologous nature of the collapse. It is estimated that the buoyancy of the bubbles causes matter in the proto-neutron star to rise, carrying neutrino-rich material to the neutron-star surface. This increases the neutrino luminosity sufficiently at early times to achieve a successful neutrino-driven explosion. Both magnetic mechanisms thus provide new means for initiating a Type II core-collapse supernova.
Archival HST/ACS data reveal details of a light echo around SN 2003gd in the galaxy M74, only the fifth supernova around which resolved echoes have been reported. An echo is detected 0."3 from the supernova between PA 250--360, with fainter signal present at a few other position angles. This material lies ~180 pc in front of the supernova, with a thickness of 60--120 pc, and may delineate the disk of M74. This structure has a gas density of 1--2 cm^{-3}, typical of the interstellar medium, however, the dust grains are smaller than those found in our Galaxy, with maximum grain sizes around 0.25micron. Since only one epoch of data exists, in two wavebands and with low signal-to-noise, deeper, annual visits should be made with HST and ground-based adaptive optics telescopes.
We investigate the generation of galactic outflows by supernova feedback in the context of SPH cosmological simulations. We use a modified version of the code GADGET-2 which includes chemical enrichment and energy feedback by Supernova. We find that energy feedback plays a fundamental role in the evolution of galaxies, heating up the cold material in the centre of the haloes and triggering outflows which efficiently transport gas from the centre to the outskirts of galaxies. The impact of feedback is found to depend on the virial mass of the system with smaller systems, such as dwarf galaxies, being more strongly affected. The outflows help to establish a self-regulated star formation process, and to transport a significant amount of metals into the haloes and even out of the systems. According to our results, energy feedback by supernovae could be the mechanism responsible for the chemical enrichment of the intergalactic medium.
Detailed quantitative spectroscopy of Type Ia supernovae (SNe~Ia) provides crucial information needed to minimize systematic effects in both ongoing SNe Ia observational programs such as the Nearby Supernova Factory, ESSENCE, and the SuperNova Legacy Survey (SNLS) and in proposed JDEM missions such as SNAP, JEDI, and DESTINY.   Quantitative spectroscopy is mandatory to quantify and understand the observational strategy of comparing ``like versus like''. It allows us to explore evolutionary effects, from variations in progenitor metallicity to variations in progenitor age, to variations in dust with cosmological epoch. It also allows us to interpret and quantify the effects of asphericity, as well as different amounts of mixing in the thermonuclear explosion.
The computational difficulty of six-dimensional neutrino radiation hydrodynamics has spawned a variety of approximations, provoking a long history of uncertainty in the core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism. Under the auspices of the Terascale Supernova Initiative, we are honoring the physical complexity of supernovae by meeting the computational challenge head-on, undertaking the development of a new adaptive mesh refinement code for self-gravitating, six-dimensional neutrino radiation magnetohydrodynamics. This code--called {\em GenASiS,} for {\em Gen}eral {\em A}strophysical {\em Si}mulation {\em S}ystem--is designed for modularity and extensibility of the physics. Presently in use or under development are capabilities for Newtonian self-gravity, Newtonian and special relativistic magnetohydrodynamics (with `realistic' equation of state), and special relativistic energy- and angle-dependent neutrino transport--including full treatment of the energy and angle dependence of scattering and pair interactions.
The X-ray emission from the circumstellar interaction in Type II supernovae with a dense circumstellar medium is calculated. In Type IIL and Type IIn supernovae mass loss rates are generally high enough for the region behind the reverse shock to be radiative, producing strong radiation, particularly in X-rays. We present a model for the emission from the cooling region in the case of a radiative reverse shock. Under the assumption of a stationary flow, a hydrodynamic model is combined with time dependent ionization balance and multilevel calculations. The applicability of the steady state approximation is discussed for various values of the ejecta density gradient and different sets of chemical composition. We show how the emerging spectrum depends strongly on the reverse shock velocity and the composition of the shocked gas. We discuss differences between a spectrum produced by this model and a single-temperature spectrum. Large differences for especially the line emission are found, which seriously can affect abundance estimates. We also illustrate the effects of absorption in the cool shocked ejecta. The applicability of our model for various types of supernovae is discussed.
Supernova neutrinos can easily be detected by a spherical gaseous TPC detector measuring very low energy nuclear recoils. The expected rates are quite large for a neutron rich target since the neutrino nucleus neutral current interaction yields a coherent contribution of all neutrons. As a matter of fact for a typical supernova at 10 kpc, about 1000 events are expected using a spherical detector of radius 4 m with Xe gas at a pressure of 10 Atm. A world wide network of several such simple, stable and low cost supernova detectors with a running time of a few centuries is quite feasible.
Dark energy and the accelerated expansion of the universe have been the direct predictions of the distant supernovae Ia observations which are also supported, indirectly, by the observations of the CMB anisotropies, gravitational lensing and the studies of galaxy clusters. Today these results are accommodated in what has become the `concordance cosmology': a universe with flat spatial sections t=constant with about 70% of its energy in the form of Einstein's cosmological constant \Lambda.   However, we find that as more and more supernovae Ia are observed, more accurately and towards higher redshift, the probability that the data are well explained by the cosmological models decreases alarmingly, finally ruling out the concordance model at more than 95% confidence level. This raises doubts against the `standard candle'-hypothesis of the supernovae Ia and their use to constrain the cosmological models. We need a better understanding of the entire SN Ia phenomenon in order to have cosmological consequences from them.
In this paper, we consider a couple of alternative dark energy models using the total equation of state of the cosmological fluid, $\wt$. These models are fit to the recent type-Ia supernovae data and are compared to previously considered models. The first model is based on the hyperbolic tangent and provides a good estimate of the rate of the transition to dark energy domination. The second model is a cubic spline model. This model demonstrates and quantifies the non-monotonicity in the total equation of state coming from the supernovae observations. At present, the supernovae observations indicate significance to non-monotonically decreasing dark energy. We derive constraints on the spline paramters and compare and constrast the results to the Cosmological Constant dark energy model. Both the hyperbolic and splines models indicate that a precise physical notion of dark enegy is a potentially ever more mysterious quantity?
The aim of this paper is to check if the models with realistic inhomogeneous matter distribution and without cosmological constant can explain the dimming of the supernovae in such a way that it can be interpreted as an acceleration of the Universe. Employing the simplest inhomogeneous model, i.e. Lemaitre-Tolman model, this paper examines the impact of inhomogeneous matter distribution on light propagation. These analyses show that realistic matter fluctuations on small scales induce brightness fluctuations in the residual Hubble diagram of amplitude around 0.15 mag, and thus can mimic acceleration. However, it is different on large scales. All these brightness fluctuations decrease with distance and hence cannot explain the dimmining of supernovae for high redshift without without invoking the cosmological constant.This paper concludes that models with realistic matter distribution (i.e. where variation of the density contrast is similar to what is observed in the local Universe) cannot explain the observed dimming of supernovae without the cosmological constant.
This paper discusses several aspects of current research on high energy emission from supernova remnants, covering the following main topics: 1) The recent evidence for magnetic field amplification near supernova remnant shocks, which makes that cosmic rays are more efficiently accelerated than previously thought. 2) The evidence that ions and electrons in some remnants have very different temperatures, and only equilibrate through Coulomb interactions. 3) The evidence that the explosion that created Cas A was asymmetric, and seems to have involved a jet/counter jet structure. And finally, 4), I will argue that the unremarkable properties of supernova remnants associated with magnetars candidates, suggest that magnetars are not formed from rapidly (P ~ 1 ms) rotating proto-neutron stars, but that it is more likely that they are formed from massive progenitors stars with high magnetic fields.
The cosmic stellar birth rate can be measured by standard astronomical techniques. It can also be probed via the cosmic stellar death rate, though until recently, this was much less precise. However, recent results based on measured supernova rates, and importantly, also on the attendant diffuse fluxes of neutrinos and gamma rays, have become competitive, and a concordant history of stellar birth and death is emerging. The neutrino flux from all past core-collapse supernovae, while faint, is realistically within reach of detection in Super-Kamiokande, and a useful limit has already been set. I will discuss predictions for this flux, the prospects for neutrino detection, the implications for understanding core-collapse supernovae, and a new limit on the contribution of type-Ia supernovae to the diffuse gamma-ray background.
Light element synthesis in supernovae through neutrino-nucleus interactions, i.e., the nu-process, is affected by neutrino oscillations in the supernova environment. There is a resonance of 13-mixing in the O/C layer, which increases the rates of charged-current nu-process reactions in the outer He-rich layer. The yields of 7Li and 11B increase by about a factor of 1.9 and 1.3, respectively, for a normal mass hierarchy and an adiabatic 13-mixing resonance, compared to those without neutrino oscillations. In the case of an inverted mass hierarchy and a non-adiabatic 13-mixing resonance, the increase in the 7Li and 11B yields is much smaller. Observations of the 7Li/11B ratio in stars showing signs of supernova enrichment could thus provide a unique test of neutrino oscillations and constrain their parameters and the mass hierarchy.
Among the important issues in identifying the progenitor system of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia), we focus mostly on circumstellar interaction in SN 2002ic, and give brief discussion on the controversial issues of the effects of rotation in merging double degenerates and steady hydrogen shell burning in accreting white dwarfs.   SN 2002ic is a unique supernova which shows the typical spectral features of SNe Ia near maximum light, but also apparent hydrogen features that have been absent in SNe Ia. Based on the hydrodynamical models of circumstellar interaction in SN Ia, we suggest that circumstellar medium is aspherical (or highly clumpy) and contains ~1.3 Msun. Possible progenitor systems of SN 2002ic are discussed.
We confront the predictions of different quintessence models with recent measurements of the luminosity distance from two sets of supernovae type Ia. In particular, we consider the 157 SNe Ia in the Gold dataset with z<1.7, and the more recent data containing 71 supernovae obtained by the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS) with z<1. We numerically solve the evolution equations for the Ratra-Peebles inverse power law model, the double exponential and the hyperbolic cosine quintessence models. We obtain confidence regions from the two datasets in the \Omega_M-\alpha and \Omega_M-w_\phi planes for the different models and compare their predictions with dark energy models with constant equation of state.
The EGRET results for gamma-ray intensities in and near the Galactic Plane have been analysed in some detail. Attention has been concentrated on energies above 1 GeV and the individual intensities in a $4^\circ$ longitude bin have been determined and compared with the large scale mean found from a nine-degree polynomial fit.   Comparison has been made of the observed standard deviation for the ratio of these intensities with that expected from variants of our model. The basic model adopts cosmic ray origin from supernova remnants, the particles then diffusing through the Galaxy with our usual 'anomalous diffusion'. The variants involve the clustering of SN, a frequency distribution for supernova explosion energies, and 'normal', rather than 'anomalous' diffusion.   It is found that for supernovae of unique energy, and our usual anomalous diffusion, clustering is necessary, particularly in the Inner Galaxy. An alternative, and preferred, situation is to adopt the model with a frequency distribution of supernova energies. The results for the Outer Galaxy are such that no clustering is required.
Neutrino oscillations affect light element synthesis through the neutrino-process in supernova explosions. The 7Li and 11B yields produced in a supernova explosion of a 16.2 solar-mass star model increase by factors of 1.9 and 1.3 in the case of large mixing angle solution with normal mass hierarchy and sin^{2}2theta_{13} > 0.002 compared with those without the oscillations. In the case of inverted mass hierarchy or nonadiabatic 13-mixing resonance, the increment of their yields is much smaller. Neutrino oscillations raise the reaction rates of charged-current neutrino-process reactions in the region outside oxygen-rich layers. The number ratio of 7Li/11B could be a tracer of normal mass hierarchy and relatively large theta_{13}, still satisfying sin^{2}2theta_{13} < 0.1, through future precise observations in stars having strong supernova component.
Observations with the Newton X-ray Multimirror Mission (XMM) show a strong periodic modulation at 6.67+/-0.03 hours of the X-ray source at the centre of the 2,000-year-old supernova remnant RCW 103. No fast pulsations are visible. If genetically tied to the supernova remnant, the source could either be an X-ray binary, comprising a compact object and a low-mass star in an eccentric orbit, or an isolated neutron star. In the latter case, its age-period combination would point to a peculiar magnetar, dramatically slowed-down, possibly by a supernova debris disc. Both scenarios require non-standard assumptions on the formation and evolution of compact objects in supernova explosions.
The sequence of massive star supernova types IIP (plateau light curve), IIL (linear light curve), IIb, IIn (narrow line), Ib, and Ic roughly represents a sequence of increasing mass loss during the stellar evolution. The mass loss affects the velocity distribution of the ejecta composition; in particular, only the IIP's typically end up with H moving at low velocity. Radio and X-ray observations of extragalactic supernovae show varying mass loss properties that are in line with expectations for the progenitor stars. For young supernova remnants, pulsar wind nebulae and circumstellar interaction provide probes of the inner ejecta and higher velocity ejecta, respectively. Among the young remnants, there is evidence for supernovae over a range of types, including those that exploded with much of the H envelope present (Crab Nebula, 3C 58, 0540--69) and those that exploded after having lost most of their H envelope (Cas A, G292.0+1.8).
Currently available Type Ia distant supernovae observed data seem to support evidence that the cosmic expansion of the universe is accelerating. This unexpected result is beyond any standard model of modern cosmology. The new concept advanced to account for the acceleration is dark energy or quintessence with negative pressure. Most analyses using this new form of energy describe the observed data with great accuracy, although there has been no laboratory confirmation of it. The present work analyzes the consequences of Thomson scattering on Type Ia supernovae data for two significant reasons; (i) recently observed data reveal the existence of sufficient amount of ionized baryonic (hydrogen) dark matter in the intergalactic medium, a necessary ingredient for Thomson scattering, and (ii) its effects have not been considered previously in determining distances to the supernovae from their observed distance moduli. Quantitative results of the present investigation based on observed data and corrected for Thomson scattering are consistent with the prediction of Hubble expansion of the universe.   Subject headings: cosmology: theory - distances and redshifts - supernovae, Hubble expansion: constituents of universe - missing dark matter
A sequence of three Chandra X-ray Observatory High Resolution Camera images taken over a span of five years reveals arc-second-scale displacement of RX J0822-4300, the stellar remnant (presumably a neutron star) near the center of the Puppis A supernova remnant. We measure its proper motion to be 0.165+/-0.025 arcsec/yr toward the west-southwest. At a distance of 2 kpc, this corresponds to a transverse space velocity of ~1600 km/s. The space velocity is consistent with the explosion center inferred from proper motions of the oxygen-rich optical filaments, and confirms the idea that Puppis A resulted from an asymmetric explosion accompanied by a kick that imparted roughly 3*10^49 ergs of kinetic energy (some 3 percent of the kinetic energy for a typical supernova) to the stellar remnant. We discuss constraints on core-collapse supernova models that have been proposed to explain neutron star kick velocities.
We present optical photometry and spectroscopy of the type IIP supernova SN 2004et that occurred in the nearby galaxy NGC 6946. The observations span a time range of 8 days to 541 days after explosion. The late time bolometric luminosity and the H$\alpha$ luminosity in the nebular phase indicate that $0.06\pm0.02{M_\odot}$ of $^{56}$Ni was synthesised during the explosion. The plateau luminosity, its duration and the expansion velocity of the supernova at the middle of the plateau indicate an explosion energy of $E_{\rm{exp}}= 1.20^{+0.38}_{-0.30} \times 10^{51}$ ergs. The late time light curve and the evolution of the [OI] and H$\alpha$ emission line profiles indicate the possibility of an early dust formation in the supernova ejecta.   The luminosity of [OI] 6300, 6364 \AA doublet, before the dust formation phase, is found to be comparable to that of SN 1987A at similar epochs, impling an oxygen mass in the range $1.5 - 2{M_\odot}$, and a main sequence mass of $20{M_\odot}$ for the progenitor.
We present (56)Ni mass estimates for seventeen well-observed type Ia supernovae determined by two independent methods. Estimates of the (56)Ni mass for each type Ia supernova are determined from (1) modeling of the late-time nebular spectrum and (2) through the combination of the peak bolometric luminosity with Arnett's rule. The attractiveness of this approach is that the comparison of estimated (56)Ni masses circumvents errors associated with the uncertainty in the adopted values of reddening and distance. We demonstrate that these two methods provide consistent estimates of the amount of (56)Ni synthesized. We also find a strong correlation between the derived (56)Ni mass and the absolute B-band magnitude (M(B)). Spectral synthesis can be used as a diagnostic to study the explosion mechanism. By obtaining more nebular spectra the Nif--M(B) correlation can be calibrated and can be used to investigate any potential systematic effects this relationship may have on the determination of cosmological parameters, and provide a new way to estimate extra-galactic distances of nearby type Ia supernovae.
We present late-epoch optical photometry (BVRI) of seven normal/super-luminous Type Ia supernovae: SN 2000E, SN 2000ce, SN 2000cx, SN 2001C, SN 2001V, SN 2001bg, SN 2001dp. The photometry of these objects was obtained using a template subtraction method to eliminate galaxy light contamination during aperture photometry. We show the optical light curves of these supernovae out to epochs of up to ~640 days after the explosion of the supernova. We show a linear decline in these data during the epoch of 200-500 days after explosion with the decline rate in the B,V,& R bands equal to about 1.4 mag/100 days, but the decline rate of the I-band is much shallower at 0.94 mag/100 days.
The interaction between supernova ejecta and circumstellar matter, arising from previous episodes of mass loss, provides us with a means with which to constrain the progenitors of supernovae. Radio observations of a number of supernovae show quasi-periodic deviations from a strict power-law decline at late times. Although several possibilities have been put forward to explain these modulations, no single explanation has proven to be entirely satisfactory. Here we suggest that Luminous Blue Variables undergoing S-Doradus type variations give rise to enhanced phases of mass loss which are imprinted on the immediate environment of the exploding star as a series of density enhancements. The variations in mass loss arise from changes in the ionization balance of Fe, the dominant ion that drives the wind. With this idea, we find that both the recurrence timescale of the variability, as well as the amplitude of the modulations are in line with the observations. Our scenario thus provides a natural, single-star explanation for the observed behaviour that is, in fact, expected on theoretical grounds.
The abundances of O, Mg, Si and Fe in the intracluster medium of the Centaurus cluster are derived. The Fe abundance has a negative radial gradient. In solar units, the Si abundance is close to the Fe abundance, while the O and Mg abundances are much smaller. The high Fe/O and Si/O ratio indicate that metal supply from supernovae Ia is important and supernovae Ia synthesize Si as well as Fe. Within 2$'$, the O and Mg abundances are consistent with the stellar metallicity of the cD galaxy derived from the Mg$_2$ index. This result indicates that the central gas is dominated by the gas from the cD galaxy. The observed abundance pattern of the Centaurus cluster resembles to those observed in center of other clusters and groups of galaxies. However, the central Fe abundance and the Si/Fe ratio are 40 % higher and 30% smaller than those of M 87, respectively. Since the accumulation timescale of the supernovae Ia is higher in the Centaurus cluster, these differences imply a time dependence of nucleosynthesis by supernovae Ia.
Strong constraints on the cosmic star formation history (SFH) have recently been established using ultraviolet and far-infrared measurements, refining the results of numerous measurements over the past decade. Taken together, the most recent and robust data indicate a compellingly consistent picture of the SFH out to redshift z~6, with especially tight constraints for z < 1. There have also been a number of dedicated efforts to measure or constrain the SFH at z~6 and beyond. It is also possible to constrain the normalisation of the SFH using a combination of electron antineutrino flux limits from Super-Kamiokande measurements and supernova rate density measurements. This review presents the latest compilation of SFH measurements, and summarises the corresponding evolution for stellar and metal mass densities, and supernova rate densities. The constraints on the normalisation of the cosmic SFH, arising from the combination of the supernova rate measurements and the measurement limit on the supernova electron antineutrino flux, are also discussed.
Observations give evidences of the presence of metals in the intergalactic medium (IGM). The stars responsible for transforming hydrogen and helium into more complex atoms do not form outside the galaxies in the standard scenario of galaxy formation. Supernovae-driven winds and their associated feedback was proposed as a possible solution to explain such enrichment of the IGM. It turned out that a proper modelling of supernovae explosions within a turbulent interstellar medium (ISM) is a difficult task. Recent advances have been obtained using a multiphase approach to solve for the thermal state of the ISM, plus some additional recipes to account for the kinetic effect of supernovae on the galactic gas. We briefly describe here our implementation of supernovae feedback within the RAMSES code, and apply it to the formation and evolution of isolated galaxies of various masses and angular momenta. We have explored under what conditions a galactic wind can develop, if one considers only a quiescent mode of star formation. We have also characterized the distribution and evolution of metallicity in the gas outflow spreading in the IGM.
Rotation-powered radio pulsars are born with inferred initial rotation periods of order 300 ms (some as short as 20 ms) in core-collapse supernovae. In the traditional picture, this fast rotation is the result of conservation of angular momentum during the collapse of a rotating stellar core. This leads to the inevitable conclusion that pulsar spin is directly correlated with the rotation of the progenitor star. So far, however, stellar theory has not been able to explain the distribution of pulsar spins, suggesting that the birth rotation is either too slow or too fast. Here we report a robust instability of the stalled accretion shock in core-collapse supernovae that is able to generate a strong rotational flow in the vicinity of the accreting proto-neutron star. Sufficient angular momentum is deposited on the proto-neutron star to generate a final spin period consistent with observations, even beginning with spherically symmetrical initial conditions. This provides a new mechanism for the generation of neutron star spin and weakens, if not breaks, the assumed correlation between the rotational periods of supernova progenitor cores and pulsar spin.
The recent discovery of a very bright type Ia supernova, SNLS-03D3bb ($\equiv$ SN 2003fg), in the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS) has raised the question of whether super-Chandrasekhar-mass white dwarf stars are needed to explain such explosions. In principle, such a progenitor could form by the mergers of two rather massive white dwarfs. Binary systems of two white dwarfs in close orbit where their total mass significantly exceeds the Chandrasekhar mass, have not yet been found. Therefore SNLS-03D3bb could establish the first clear case of a double-degenerate progenitor of a (peculiar) type Ia supernovae. Moreover, if this interpretation is correct, it casts some doubt on the universality of the calibration relations used to make SNe Ia distance indicators for cosmology. Here we present a critical discussion of the expected observational finger prints of super-Chandrasekhar-mass explosions; in important respects, these are not consistent with the observations of SNLS-03D3bb. We demonstrate that the lop-sided explosion of a Chandrasekhar-mass white dwarf could provide a better explanation.
Several problematical epochs in cosmology, including the recent period of structure formation (and acceleration), require us to understand cosmic evolution during times when the basis of FRW expansion, the cosmological principle, does not completely hold true. We consider that the breakdown of isotropy and homogeneity at such times may be an important key towards understanding cosmic evolution. To study this, we examine fluctuations in the high-z supernova data to search for signs of large-scale anisotropy in the Hubble expansion. Using a cosmological-model-independent statistical analysis, we find mild evidence of real anisotropy in various circumstances. We consider the significance of these results, and the importance of further searches for violations of the cosmological principle.
Supernova 1987A, the first naked-eye supernova observed since Kepler's supernova in 1604, defies a number of theoretical expectations. Its anomalies have long been attributed to a merger between two massive stars that occurred some 20,000 years before the explosion, but so far there has been no conclusive proof that this merger took place. Here, we present three-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations of the mass ejection associated with such a merger and the subsequent evolution of the ejecta, and we show that this accurately reproduces the properties of the triple-ring nebula surrounding the supernova.
Aims: We present the first full-star three-dimensional explosion simulations of thermonuclear supernovae including parameterized deflagration-to-detonation transitions that occur once the flame enters the distributed burning regime. Methods: Treating the propagation of both the deflagration and the detonation waves in a common front-tracking approach, the detonation is prevented from crossing ash regions. Results: Our criterion triggers the detonation wave at the outer edge of the deflagration flame and consequently it has to sweep around the complex structure and to compete with expansion. Despite the impeded detonation propagation, the obtained explosions show reasonable agreement with global quantities of observed type Ia supernovae. By igniting the flame in different numbers of kernels around the center of the exploding white dwarf, we set up three different models shifting the emphasis from the deflagration phase to the detonation phase. The resulting explosion energies and iron group element productions cover a large part of the diversity of type Ia supernovae. Conclusions: Flame-driven deflagration-to-detonation transitions, if hypothetical, remain a possibility deserving further investigation.
SN 2000ft is detected in two independent Planetary Camera images (F547W and F814W) taken May 13, 2000, about two months before the predicted date of the explosion (July 19, 2000), based on the analysis of its radio light evolution by Alberdi and collaborators. The apparent optical magnitudes and red color of SN 2000ft indicate that it is observed through an extinction of at least A$_V$= 3.0 magnitudes. The extinction corrected lower limit to the absolute visual magnitude (M$_V$ $\leq -$ 18.0), identifies SN 2000ft as a luminous supernova in the optical, as other luminous radio supernovae before. SN 2000ft exploded in a region located at only 0.1 arcsec (i.e. 34 +/- 3 pc) west of a faint cluster (C24). No parent cluster is identified within the detection limits of the HST short exposures. The unambiguous detection of SN 2000ft in the visual shows that multi-epoch sub-arcsecond (FWHM less than 0.1 arcsec) optical imaging is also a valid tool that should be explored further to detect supernovae in the dusty (circum)nuclear regions of (U)LIRGs.
Most of the observational claims in cosmology are based on the assumption that the universe is isotropic and homogeneous so they essentially test different types of Friedmann models. This also refers to recent observations of supernovae Ia, which, within the framework of Friedmann cosmologies give strong support to negative pressure matter and also weaken the age conflict. In this essay we drop the assumption of homogeneity, though temporarily leaving the assumption of isotropy with respect to one point, and show that supernovae data can be consistent with a model of the universe with inhomogeneous pressure known as the Stephani model. Being consistent with supernovae data we are able to get the age of the universe in this model to be about 3.8 Gyr more than in its Friedmann counterpart.
The recent type Ia supernova data suggest that the universe is accelerating now and decelerated in recent past. This may provide the evidence that the standard Friedmann equation needs to be modified. We analyze in detail a new model in the context of modified Friedmann equation using the supernova data published by the High-$z$ Supernova Search Team and the Supernova Cosmology Project. The new model explains recent acceleration and past deceleration. Furthermore, the new model also gives a decelerated universe in the future.
A new mechanism of supernova shock revival is proposed, which involves resonant spin--flavor precession of neutrinos with a transition magnetic moment in the magnetic field of the supernova. The mechanism can be operative in supernovae for transition magnetic moments as small as $10^{-14}\mu_B$ provided the neutrino mass squared difference is in the range $\Delta m^2 \sim (3 \;{\rm eV})^2-(600 \;{\rm eV})^2$. It is shown that this mechanism can increase the neutrino--induced shock reheating energy by about 60\%.
Neutrinos and antineutrinos of all three flavours are emitted during the post bounce phase of a core collapse supernova with $\numu/\nutau (\anumu/\anutau)$ having average energies more than that of $\nue(\anue)$. They can be detected by the new earth bound detector like SNO and Super-Kamiokande which are sensitive to neutrinos of all three flavours. In this letter we consider the effect of flavour oscillations on the neutrino flux and their expected number of events at the detector. We do a three-generation analysis and for the mass and mixing schemes we first consider the threefold maximal mixing model consistent with the solar and the atmospheric neutrino data and next a scenario with one $\Delta m^2 \sim 10^{-11} eV^2$ (solar range) and the other $\Delta m^2 \sim 10^{-18} eV^2$, for which the oscillation length is of the order of the supernova distance. In both these scenarios there are no matter effects in the resultant neutrino spectrum and one is concerned with vacuum oscillations. We find that though neutrino oscillations result in a depletion in the number of $\nue$ and $\anue$ coming from the supernova, the actual signals at the detectors are appreciable enhanced.
We study the role that the future detection of the neutrino burst from a galactic supernova can play in the reconstruction of the neutrino mass spectrum. We consider all possible 3$\nu$ mass and flavor spectra which describe the solar and atmospheric neutrino data. For each of these spectra we find the observable effects of the supernova neutrino conversions both in the matter of the star and the earth. We show that studies of the electron neutrino and anineutrino spectra as well as observations of the neutral current effects from supernova will allow us (i) to identify the solar neutrino solution, (ii) to determine the type of mass hierarchy (normal or inverted) and (iii) to probe the mixing $|U_{e3}|^2$ to values as low as $10^{-4} - 10^{-3}$.
The next core-collapse supernova in our Galaxy will be a spectacular event, with some $10^4$ neutrino detections in total expected among several detectors. This data will allow unprecedented tests of neutrino properties and new opportunities in astrophysics. In this paper, I focus on two main topics: (1) Measurement of the $\nu_\mu$ and $\nu_\tau$ masses by time-of-flight, with an emphasis on introducing as little supernova model dependence as possible, and (2) Methods for locating a supernova by its neutrinos in advance of the light, which may allow improved astronomical observations. In the latter, I also discuss the recent result that the positrons from $\bar{\nu}_e + p \to e^+ + n$ are not isotropically emitted, as commonly thought.
Neutrino masses arising from the spontaneous violation of ungauged lepton-number are accompanied by a physical Goldstone boson, generically called Majoron. In the high-density supernova medium the effects of Majoron-emitting neutrino decays are important even if they are suppressed in vacuo by small neutrino masses and/or small off-diagonal couplings. We reconsider the influence of these decays on the neutrino signal of supernovae in the light of recent Super-Kamiokande data on solar and atmospheric neutrinos. We find that majoron-neutrino coupling constants in the range $3\times 10^{-7}\lsim g\lsim 2\times 10^{-5}$ or $g \gsim 3 \times 10^{-4}$ are excluded by the observation of SN1987A. Then we discuss the potential of Superkamiokande and the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory to detect majoron neutrino interactions in the case of a future galactic supernova. We find that these experiments could probe majoron neutrino interactions with improved sensitivity.
We calculated the expected neutrino signal in Borexino from a typical Type II supernova at a distance of 10 kpc. A burst of around 110 events would appear in Borexino within a time interval of about 10 s. Most of these events would come from the reaction channel $\bar{\nu}_e+p\to e^++n$, while about 30 events would be induced by the interaction of the supernova neutrino flux on $^{12}$C in the liquid scintillator. Borexino can clearly distinguish between the neutral-current excitations $^{12}{C}(\nu,\nu')^{12}{C}^*$(15.11 MeV) and the charged-current reactions $^{12}{C}(\nu_e,e^-)^{12}{N}$ and $^{12}{C}(\bar{\nu}_e,e^+)^{12}{B}$, via their distinctive event signatures. The ratio of the charged-current to neutral-current neutrino event rates and their time profiles with respect to each other can provide a handle on supernova and non-standard neutrino physics (mass and flavor oscillations).
Recently, Csaki, Kaloper and Terning (CKT) suggested that axion-photon oscillation in the intergalactic medium can explain the observed dimming of distant type Ia supernovae. This mechanism works only if the initial axion flux is much smaller than the initial photon flux. We study several mechanisms for such initial axion production. The direct axion production in the supernovae, the photon-axion oscillation in the magnetic field of supernovae and in the magnetic field of their host galaxies are addressed. We find it likely that the initial axion flux is very small and therefore does not pose a problem to the CKT mechanism.
We consider the mixing of muon and tau neutrinos with sterile fermion fields propagating in extra dimensions in the context of core collapse supernova physics, extending the analysis of the electron neutrino case done in a previous work. We show that the potentially dramatic modifications to the supernova evolution are prevented by a mechanism of feedback, so that no severe bounds on the parameters of the extra dimensions need to be imposed. Nevertheless, the supernova core evolution is significantly modified. We discuss the consequences on the delayed explosion mechanism and the compatibility with the SN1987A signal. Then, for the cases of both nu_{mu,tau} and nu_e mixing with bulk fermions, we analyse the distinctive features of the signal on Earth.
It has recently been realized that supernova neutrino signals may be affected by shock propagation over a time interval of a few seconds after bounce. In the standard three-neutrino oscillation scenario, such effects crucially depend on the neutrino level crossing probability P_H in the 1-3 sector. By using a simplified parametrization of the time-dependent supernova radial density profile, we explicitly show that simple analytical expressions for P_H accurately reproduce the phase-averaged results of numerical calculations in the relevant parameter space. Such expressions are then used to study the structure of P_H as a function of energy and time, with particular attention to cases involving multiple crossing along the shock profile. Illustrative applications are given in terms of positron spectra generated by supernova electron antineutrinos through inverse beta decay.
Models with extra space dimensions naturally provide for the existence of fermions that propagate in them. These are seen in 4D as an infinite tower of sterile neutrinos possibly mixed with the Standard Model ones. We consider the effect of such a mixing in the context of core collapse supernova physics. We show that the potentially dramatic modifications to the supernova evolution (commonly believed to set very strong bounds on the parameters of the extra dimensions) are prevented by a mechanism of feedback, so that much weaker bounds need to be imposed. Nevertheless, the supernova core evolution is significantly modified. We discuss the compatibility with the SN1987a signal and we analyse the distinctive signatures of the neutrino signal on Earth.
We investigate the initial progenitor mass dependence of the early-phase neutrino signal from supernovae taking neutrino oscillations into account. The early-phase analysis has advantages in that it is not affected by the time evolution of the density structure of the star due to shock propagation or whether the remnant is a neutron star or a black hole. The initial mass affects the evolution of the massive star and its presupernova structure, which is important for two reasons when considering the neutrino signal. First, the density profile of the mantle affects the dynamics of neutrino oscillation in supernova. Second, the final iron core structure determines the features of the neutrino burst, i.e., the luminosity and the average energy. We find that both effects are rather small. This is desirable when we try to extract information on neutrino parameters from future supernova-neutrino observations. Although the uncertainty due to the progenitor mass is not small for intermediate $\theta_{13}$ ($10^{-5} \lesssim \sin^{2}{2 \theta_{13}} \lesssim 10^{-3}$), we can, nevertheless, determine the character of the mass hierarchy and whether $\theta_{13}$ is very large or very small.
A liquid Argon TPC (ICARUS-like) has the ability to detect neutrino bursts from type-II supernova collapses, via three processes: elastic scattering by electrons from all neutrino species, and $\nu_e$ charged current absorption on $Ar$ with production of excited $K$ and $\bar\nu_e$ charged current absorption on $Ar$ with production of excited $Cl$. In this paper we have used new calculations in the random phase approximation (RPA) for the absorption processes. The anti-neutrino reaction $\bar\nu_e ^{40}Ar$ absorption has been considered for the first time. For definiteness, we compute rates for the 3 kton ICARUS detector: 244 events are expected from a supernova at a distance of 10 kpc, without considering oscillation effects. The impact of oscillations in the neutrino rates will be discussed in a separate paper. We also discuss the ability to determine the direction of the supernova.
We demonstrate that the detection of shock modulations of the neutrino spectra from a galactic core-collapse supernova is sufficient to obtain a high significance determination of the neutrino mass hierarchy if the supernova event is observed in both a Mton-class water Cherenkov detector and a 100 kton-class liquid argon detector. Neither detailed supernova neutrino flux modelling nor observation of Earth matter effects is needed for this determination. As a corollary, a nonzero value of \theta_x will be established.
We show how by studying the Earth matter effect on oscillations of solar and supernova neutrinos inside the Earth one can in principle reconstruct the electron number density profile of the Earth. A direct inversion of the oscillation problem is possible due to the existence of a very simple analytic formula for the Earth matter effect on oscillations of solar and supernova neutrinos. From the point of view of the Earth tomography, these oscillations have a number of advantages over the oscillations of the accelerator or atmospheric neutrinos, which stem from the fact that solar and supernova neutrinos are coming to the Earth as mass eigenstates rather than flavour eigenstates. In particular, this allows reconstruction of density profiles even over relatively short neutrino path lengths in the Earth, and also of asymmetric profiles. We study the requirements that future experiments must meet to achieve a given accuracy of the tomography of the Earth.
Diagnosing core of supernova requires favor-dependent reconstruction of three species of neutrino spectra, \nu_e, \bar{\nu}_{e} and \nu_x (a collective notation for \nu_{\mu}, \bar{\nu}_{\mu}, \nu_{\tau}, and \bar{\nu}_{\tau}). We point out that, assuming the information available, CPT symmetry can be tested with supernova neutrinos. We classify all possible level crossing patterns of neutrinos and antineutrinos into six cases and show that half of them contains only the CPT violating mass and mixing patterns. We discuss how additional informations from terrestrial experiments help identifying CPT violation by narrowing down the possible flux patterns. Although the method may not be good at precision test, it is particularly suited to uncover gross violation of CPT such as different mass patterns of neutrinos and antineutrinos. The power of the method is due to the nature of level crossing in supernova which results in the sensitivity to neutrino mass hierarchy and to the unique characteristics of in situ preparation of both \nu and \bar{\nu} beams. Implications of our discussion to the conventional analyses with CPT conservation are also briefly mentioned.
The coherent contribution of all neutrons in neutrino nucleus scattering due to the neutral current offers a realistic prospect of detecting supernova neutrinos. For a typical supernova at 10 kpc, about 1000 events are expected using a spherical gaseous detector of radius 4 m and employing Xe gas at a pressure of 10 Atm. We propose a world wide network of several such simple, stable and low cost supernova detectors with a running time of a few centuries.
The signatures of sterile neutrinos in the supernova neutrino signal in megaton water Cerenkov detectors are studied. Time dependent modulation of the neutrino signal emerging from the sharp changes in the oscillation probability due to shock waves is shown to be a smoking gun for the existence of sterile neutrinos. These modulations and indeed the entire neutrino oscillation signal is found to be different for the case with just three active neutrinos and the cases where there are additional sterile species mixed with the active neutrinos. The effect of turbulence is taken into account and it is found that the effect of the shock waves, while modifed, remain significant and measurable. Supernova neutrino signals in water detectors can therefore give unambiguous proof for the existence of sterile neutrinos, the sensitivity extending beyond that for terrestial neutrino experiments. In addition the time dependent modulations in the signal due to shock waves can be used to trace the evolution of the shock wave inside the supernova.
All of the actinides and roughly half the natural abundance of elements with mass number A > 70 come from the rapid neutron capture process, or the r-process. If the r-process, as suggested by many, occurs deep in a supernova, then it is under the influence of an intense neutrino flux. Here we discuss the effects of both charged-current and neutral-current neutrino interactions on the r-process. We show that the multiple-neutron emission induced by both kinds of neutrino interactions can affect the observed r-process abundance pattern significantly. In particular, we find that five nuclei below the r-process abundance peak at A = 195 may be entirely attributed to the neutrino-induced neutron spallation processes following the r-process freeze-out. Furthermore, the deduced neutrino fluence agrees with the conditions in the recent supernova r-process model. These results strongly argue that the r-process occurs in supernovae. They also provide a sensitive probe for the conditions at the supernova r-process site.
While the members of the Type IIn category of supernovae are united by the presence of strong multicomponent Balmer emission lines in their spectra, they are quite heterogeneous with respect to other properties such as Balmer line profiles, light curves, strength of radio emission, and intrinsic brightness. We are now beginning to see variety among SNe IIn in their polarimetric characteristics as well, some but not all of which may be due to inclination angle effects. The increasing number of known "hybrid" SNe with IIn-like emission lines suggests that circumstellar material may be more common around all types of SNe than previously thought. Investigation of the correlations between spectropolarimetric signatures and other IIn attributes will help us address the question of classification of "interacting SNe" and the possibility of distinguishing different groups within the diverse IIn subclass.
The reverse shock of supernova remnant (SNR) 1987A emits in H-alpha and Ly-alpha, and comes in two flavors: surface and interior. The former is due to direct, impact excitation of hydrogen atoms crossing the shock, while the latter is the result of charge transfer reactions between these atoms and slower, post-shock ions. Interior and surface emission are analogous to the broad- and narrow-line components observed in Balmer-dominated SNRs. I summarize a formalism to derive line intensities and ratios in these SNRs, as well as a study of the transition zone in supernova shocks; I include an appendix where I derive in detail the ratio of broad to narrow H-alpha emission. Further study of the reverse shock emission from SNR 1987A will allow us to predict when it will vanish and further investigate the origins of the interior emission.
The motivations to make ultraviolet (UV) studies of supernovae (SNe) are reviewed and discussed in the light of the results obtained so far by means of IUE and HST observations. It appears that UV studies of SNe can, and do lead to fundamental results not only for our understanding of the SN phenomenon, such as the kinematics and the metallicity of the ejecta, but also for exciting new findings in Cosmology, such as the tantalizing evidence for "dark energy" that seems to pervade the Universe and to dominate its energetics. The need for additional and more detailed UV observations is also considered and discussed.
We have recently confirmed SN 1996cr as a late-time type IIn supernova (SN) via VLT spectroscopy and isolated its explosion date to ~1 yr using archival optical imaging. We briefly touch upon here the wealth of optical, X-ray, and radio archival observations available for this enigmatic source. Due to its relative proximity (3.8 +/-0.6 Mpc), SN 1996cr ranks among the brightest X-ray and radio SNe ever detected and, as such, may offer powerful insights into the structure and composition of type IIn SNe. We also find that SN 1996cr is matched to GRB 4B 960202 at a 2-3 sigma confidence level, making it perhaps the third GRB to be significantly associated with a type II SN. We speculate on whether SN 1996cr could be an off-axis or ``failed'' GRB.
We explore the dependence of pre-supernova evolution and supernova nucleosynthesis yields on the uncertainties in helium burning reaction rates. Using the revised solar abundances of Lodders (2003) for the initial stellar composition, instead of those of Anders & Grevesse (1989), changes the supernova yields and limits the constraints that those yields place on the 12C(a,g)16O reaction rate. The production factors of medium-weight elements (A = 16-40) were found to be in reasonable agreement with observed solar ratios within the current experimental uncertainties in the triple alpha reaction rate. Simultaneous variations by the same amount in both reaction rates or in either of them separately, however, can induce significant changes in the central 12C abundance at core carbon ignition and in the mass of the supernova remnant. It therefore remains important to have experimental determinations of the helium burning rates so that their ratio and absolute values are known with an accuracy of 10% or better.
We examine a phenomenon recently predicted by numerical simulations of supernova neutrino flavor evolution: the swapping of supernova $\nu_e$ and $\nu_{\mu,\tau}$ energy spectra below (above) energy $\EC$ for the normal (inverted) neutrino mass hierarchy. We present the results of large-scale numerical calculations which show that in the normal neutrino mass hierarchy case, $\EC$ decreases as the assumed $\nu_e\rightleftharpoons\nu_{\mu,\tau}$ effective $2\times 2$ vacuum mixing angle ($\simeq \theta_{1 3}$) is decreased. However, these calculations also indicate that $\EC$ is essentially independent of the vacuum mixing angle in the inverted neutrino mass hierarchy case. With a good neutrino signal from a future Galactic supernova, the above results could be used to determine the neutrino mass hierarchy even if $\theta_{13}$ is too small to be detected in terrestrial neutrino oscillation experiments.
Gamma- and X-rays resulting from radioactive decays provide a potentially powerful tool to investigate the explosion physics of supernovae, since the distribution and the amount of radioactive isotopes are strongly dependent on properties of the explosion. In this paper, expected features of these high energy emissions are presented for bipolar jet-induced explosion models, which are recently favored for very energetic supernovae and even for typical Type Ib/c supernovae. It is shown that combination of various observations, i.e., line-to-continuum ratio, photoelectric absorption cut-off energy, line profiles and luminosities, allows the unique determination of the explosion energy, the amount of radioactive 56Ni, the explosion geometry, and even the viewing orientation.
We investigate the possibility of boiling instability of nuclear liquid in the inner core of the proto-neutron star formed in the core collapse of a type II supernova. We derive a simple criterion for boiling to occur. Using this criterion for one of best described equations of state of supernova matter, we find that boiling is quite possible under the conditions realized inside the proto-neutron star. We discuss consequences of this process such as the increase of heat transfer rate and pressure in the boiling region. We expect that taking this effect into account in the conventional neutrino-driven delayed-shock mechanism of type II supernova explosions can increase the explosion energy and reduce the mass of the neutron-star remnant.
Shell-type Supernova remnants (SNRs) have long been known to harbour a population of ultra-relativistic particles, accelerated in the Supernova shock wave by the mechanism of diffusive shock acceleration. Experimental evidence for the existence of electrons up to energies of ~100 TeV was first provided by the detection of hard X-ray synchrotron emission as e.g. in the shell of the young SNR SN1006. Furthermore using theoretical arguments shell-type Supernova remnants have long been considered as the main accelerator of protons - Cosmic rays - in the Galaxy; definite proof of this process is however still missing. Pulsar Wind Nebulae (PWN) - diffuse structures surrounding young pulsars - are another class of objects known to be a site of particle acceleration in the Galaxy, again through the detection of hard synchrotron X-rays such as in the Crab Nebula. Gamma-rays above 100 MeV provide a direct access to acceleration processes. The GLAST Large Area telescope (LAT) will be operating in the energy range between 30 MeV and 300 GeV and will provide excellent sensitivity, angular and energy resolution in a previously rather poorly explored energy band. We will describe prospects for the investigation of these Galactic particle accelerators with GLAST.
Although delayed detonation models of thermonuclear explosions of white dwarfs seem promising for reproducing Type Ia supernovae, the transition of the flame propagation mode from subsonic deflagration to supersonic detonation remains hypothetical. A potential instant for this transition to occur is the onset of the distributed burning regime, i.e. the moment when turbulence first affects the internal flame structure. Some studies of the burning microphysics indicate that a deflagration-to-detonation transition may be possible here, provided the turbulent intensities are strong enough. Consequently, the magnitude of turbulent velocity fluctuations generated by the deflagration flame is analyzed at the onset of the distributed burning regime in several three-dimensional simulations of deflagrations in thermonuclear supernovae. It is shown that the corresponding probability density functions fall off towards high turbulent velocity fluctuations much more slowly than a Gaussian distribution. Thus, values claimed to be necessary for triggering a detonation are likely to be found in sufficiently large patches of the flame. Although the microphysical evolution of the burning is not followed and a successful deflagration-to-detonation transition cannot be guaranteed from simulations presented here, the results still indicate that such events may be possible in Type Ia supernova explosions.
We present results of 3-neutrino flavor evolution simulations for the neutronization burst from an O-Ne-Mg core-collapse supernova. We find that nonlinear neutrino self-coupling engineers a single spectral feature of stepwise conversion in the inverted neutrino mass hierarchy case and in the normal mass hierarchy case, a superposition of two such features corresponding to the vacuum neutrino mass-squared differences associated with solar and atmospheric neutrino oscillations. These neutrino spectral features offer a unique potential probe of the conditions in the supernova environment and may allow us to distinguish between O-Ne-Mg and Fe core-collapse supernovae.
It is generally believed that the explosion which gave birth to the Cassiopeia A supernova remmant resulted from core collapse of a hydrogen-deficient star. A progenitor that has lost all its hydrogen envelope and part of its helium envelope would lead to an explosion with the optical properties of a Type Ic supernova. There is evidence, if not general agreement, that Flamsteed observed the Cas A supernova as a sixth magnitude object in August, 1680. If an explosion with a typical SNIc light curve at the position and distance of Cas A attained maximum luminosity during the winter of 1679-1680, it would at that time have been poorly situated for visual observation, as its upper culmination would have taken place during daylight, while in August, between 170-200 days after peak luminosity, it would have been a sixth magnitude star.
We study CP-violation effects when neutrinos are present in dense matter, such as outside the proto-neutron star formed in a core-collapse supernova. Using general arguments based on the Standard Model, we confirm that there are no CP-violating effects at the tree level on the electron neutrino and anti-neutrino fluxes in a core-collapse supernova. On the other hand significant effects can be obtained for muon and tau neutrinos even at the tree level. We show that CP violating effects can be present in the supernova electron (anti)neutrino fluxes as well, if muon and tau neutrinos have different fluxes at the neutrinosphere. Such differences could arise due to physics beyond the Standard Model, such as the presence of flavor-changing interactions.
Supernova 2006gy in the galaxy NGC 1260 is the most luminous one recorded \cite{2006CBET..644....1Q, 2006CBET..647....1H, 2006CBET..648....1P, 2006CBET..695....1F}. Its progenitor might have been a very massive ($>100$ \msun) star \cite{2006astro.ph.12617S}, but that is incompatible with hydrogen in the spectrum of the supernova, because stars $>40$ \msun are believed to have shed their hydrogen envelopes several hundred thousand years before the explosion \cite{2005A&A...429..581M}. Alternatively, the progenitor might have arisen from the merger of two massive stars \cite{2007ApJ...659L..13O}. Here we show that the collision frequency of massive stars in a dense and young cluster (of the kind to be expected near the center of a galaxy) is sufficient to provide a reasonable chance that SN 2006gy resulted from such a bombardment. If this is the correct explanation, then we predict that when the supernova fades (in a year or so) a dense cluster of massive stars becomes visible at the site of the explosion.
We explore the abundance of light clusters in core-collapse supernovae at post-bounce stage in a quantum statistical approach. Adopting the profile of a supernova core from detailed numerical simulations, we study the distribution of light bound clusters up to alpha particles (A=2-4) as well as heavy nuclei (A > 4) in dense matter at finite temperature. Within the frame of a cluster-mean field approach, the abundances of light clusters are evaluated accounting for self-energy, Pauli blocking and effects of continuum correlations. We find that deuterons and tritons, in addition to 3He and 4He, appear abundantly in a wide region from the surface of the proto-neutron star to the position of the shock wave. The appearance of light clusters may modify the neutrino emission in the cooling region and the neutrino absorption in the heating region, and, thereby, influence the supernova mechanism.
For more than fifty years, it has been believed that cosmic ray (CR) nuclei are accelerated to high energies in the rapidly expanding shockwaves created by powerful supernova explosions. Yet observational proof of this conjecture is still lacking. Recently, Uchiyama and collaborators reported the detection of small-scale X-ray flares in one such supernova remnant, dubbed 'RX J1713-3946' (a.k.a. G347.3-0.5), which also emits very energetic, TeV (10^12 eV) range, gamma-rays. They contend that the variability of these X-ray 'hotspots' implies that the magnetic field in the remnant is about a hundred times larger than normally assumed; and this, they say, means that the detected TeV range photons were produced in energetic nuclear interactions, providing 'a strong argument for acceleration of protons and nuclei to energies of 1 PeV (10^15 eV) and beyond in young supernova remnants.' We point out here that the existing multiwavelength data on this object certainly do not support such conclusions. Though intriguing, the small-scale X-ray flares are not the long sought-after 'smoking gun' of nucleonic CR acceleration in SNRs.
Collective neutrino flavor transformations deep inside a supernova are sensitive to the neutrino mass hierarchy even at extremely small values of theta(13). Exploiting this effect, we show that comparison of the antineutrino signals from a galactic supernova in two megaton class water Cherenkov detectors, one of which is shadowed by the Earth, will enable us to distinguish between the hierarchies if sin^2 theta(13) < 10^{-5}. On the other hand, the observation of Earth effects in the inverted hierarchy for sin^2 theta(13) > 10^{-3} will provide a robust observable signature of collective oscillations occurring deep inside the supernova.
We reexamine the possibility of reconstructing the initial fluxes of supernova neutrinos emitted in a future core-collapse galactic supernova explosion and detected in a Megaton-sized water Cherenkov detector. A novel key element in our method is the inclusion, in addition to the total and the average energies of each neutrino species, of a "pinching" parameter characterizing the width of the distribution as a fit parameter. We uncover in this case a continuous degeneracy in the reconstructed parameters of supernova neutrino fluxes at the neutrinosphere. We analyze in detail the features of this degeneracy and show how it occurs irrespective of the parametrization used for the distribution function. Given that this degeneracy is real we briefly comment on possible steps towards resolving it, which necessarily requires going beyond the setting presented here.
I discuss observational clues concerning episodic mass-loss properties of massive stars in the time before the final supernova explosion. In particular, I will focus on the mounting evidence that LBVs and related stars are candidates for supernova progenitors, even though current paradigms place them at the end of core-H burning. Namely, conditions in the immediate circumstellar environment within a few 10$^2$ AU of Type IIn supernovae require very high progenitor mass-loss rates. Those rates are so high that the only known stars that come close are LBVs during rare giant eruptions. I will highlight evidence from observations of some recent extraordinary supernovae suggesting that explosive or episodic mass loss (a.k.a. LBV eruptions like the 19th century eruption of Eta Car) occur in the 5-10 years immediately preceding the SN. Finally, I will discuss some implications for stellar evolution from these SNe, the most important of which is the observational fact that the most massive stars can indeed make it to the ends of their lives with substantial H envelopes intact, even at Solar metallicity.
We report the discovery of a partial ~2deg. diameter non-thermal radio shell coincident with Taz, the pulsar wind nebula (PWN) in the error box of the apparently variable gamma-ray source 3EG J1809-2328. We propose that this radio shell is a newly identified supernova remnant (SNR G7.5-1.7) associated with the PWN. The SNR surrounds an amorphous region of thermal X-rays detected in archival ROSAT and ASCA observations putting this system in the mixed-morphology class of supernova remnants. G7.5-1.7 is the fifth such supernova remnant coincident with a bright GeV source, and the fourth containing a pulsar wind nebulae.
Using an extensive compilation of literature supernova rate data we study to which extent its evolution constrains the star formation history, the distribution of the type Ia supernova (SNIa) progenitor's lifetime, the mass range of core-collapse supernova (CCSN) progenitors, and the evolution of the iron density in the field.   We find that the diagnostic power of the cosmic SNIa rate on their progenitor model is relatively weak. More promising is the use of the evolution of the SNIa rate in galaxy clusters. We find that the CCSN rate is compatible with a Salpeter IMF, with a minimum mass for their progenitors > 10 Msun. We estimate the evolution in the field of the iron density released by SNe and find that in the local universe the iron abundance should be ~ 0.1 solar. We discuss the difference between this value and the iron abundance in clusters.
The process of the two-step conversion of the neutrino helicity, $\nu_L \to \nu_R \to \nu_L$, is analysed in the supernova conditions, where the first stage is realized due to the interaction of the neutrino magnetic moment with the plasma electrons and protons in the supernova core. The second stage is caused by the neutrino resonant spin-flip in a magnetic field of the supernova envelope. Given the neutrino magnetic moment within the interval $10^{-13} \mu_{\rm B} < \mu_\nu < 10^{-12} \mu_{\rm B}$, and with the existence of the magnetic field at the scale $\sim 10^{13}$ G between the neutrinosphere and the shock-wave stagnation region, it is shown that an additional energy of the order of $10^{51}$ erg can be injected into this region during the typical time of the shock-wave stagnation. This energy could be sufficient for stumulation of the damped shock wave.
We present the spectra of 36 Supernovae (SNe) of various types, obtained by the European Supernova Collaboration. Because of the spectral classification and the phase determination at their discovery the SNe did not warrant further study, and the spectra we present are the only available for the respective objects. In this paper we present and discuss this material using a new software for the automated classification of SNe spectra.   As a validation of the software, we verify the classification and phase estimate reported for these objects in their discovery / classification circulars. For the comparison, the software uses the library of template spectra of Padova-Asiago Supernova Archive (ASA).   For each spectrum of our sample we present a brief, individual discussion, highlighting the main characteristics and possible peculiarities. The comparison with ASA spectra confirms the previous classification of all objects and refines the age estimates. For our software we determine numerical limits of "safe" spectral classification and the uncertainties of the phase determination.
The application of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) as distance indicators in cosmology calls for a sound understanding of these objects. Recent years have seen a brisk development of astrophysical models which explain SNe Ia as thermonuclear explosions of white dwarf stars. While the evolution of the progenitor is still uncertain, the explosion mechanism certainly involves the propagation of a thermonuclear flame through the white dwarf star. Three-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations allowed to study a wide variety of possibilities involving subsonic flame propagation (deflagrations), flames accelerated by turbulence, and supersonic detonations. These possibilities lead to a variety of scenarios. I review the currently discussed approaches and present some recent results from simulations of the turbulent deflagration model and the delayed detonation model.
The major role type Ia supernovae play in many fields of astrophysics and in particular in cosmological distance determinations calls for self-consistent models of these events. Since their mechanism is believed to crucially depend on phenomena that are inherently three-dimensional, self-consistent numerical models of type Ia supernovae must be multi-dimensional. This field has recently seen a rapid development, which is reviewed in this article. The different modeling approaches are discussed and as an illustration a particular explosion model -- the deflagration model -- in a specific numerical implementation is presented in greater detail. On this exemplary case, the procedure of validating the model on the basis of comparison with observations is discussed as well as its application to study questions arising from type Ia supernova cosmology.
We present an analysis of the chemical abundances of the star Tycho G in the direction of the remnant of supernova (SN) 1572, based on Keck high-resolution optical spectra. The stellar parameters of this star are found to be those of a G-type subgiant with $T_{\mathrm{eff}} = 5900 \pm 100$ K, \loggl $ = 3.85 \pm 0.30$ dex, and $\mathrm{[Fe/H]} = -0.05 \pm 0.09$. This determination agrees with the stellar parameters derived for the star in a previous survey for the possible companion star of SN 1572 (Ruiz-Lapuente et al. 2004). The chemical abundances follow the Galactic trends, except for Ni, which is overabundant relative to Fe, $[{\rm Ni/Fe}] $ $=$ 0.16 $\pm$ 0.04. Co is slightly overabundant (at a low significance level). These enhancements in Fe-peak elements could have originated from pollution by the supernova ejecta. We find a surprisingly high Li abundance for a star that has evolved away from the main sequence. We discuss these findings in the context of companion stars of supernovae.
We discuss the generic characteristics of stochastic particle acceleration by a fully developed turbulence spectrum and show that resonant interactions of particles with high speed waves dominate the acceleration process. To produce the relativistic electrons inferred from the broadband spectrum of a few well-observed shell-type supernova remnants in the leptonic scenario for the TeV emission, fast mode waves must be excited effectively in the downstream and dominate the turbulence in the subsonic phase. Strong collisionless non-relativistic astrophysical shocks are studied with the assumption of a constant Aflven speed. The energy density of non-thermal electrons is found to be comparable to that of the magnetic field. With reasonable parameters, the model explains observations of shell-type supernova remnants. More detailed studies are warranted to better understand the nature of supernova shocks.
We explore the implications of the QCD phase transition during the postbounce evolution of core-collapse supernovae. Using the MIT bag model for the description of quark matter and assuming small bag constants, we find that the phase transition occurs during the early postbounce accretion phase. This stage of the evolution can be simulated with general relativistic three-flavor Boltzmann neutrino transport. The phase transition produces a second shock wave that triggers a delayed supernova explosion. If such a phase transition happens in a future galactic supernova, its existence and properties should become observable as a second peak in the neutrino signal that is accompanied by significant changes in the energy of the emitted neutrinos. In contrast to the first neutronization burst, this second neutrino burst is dominated by the emission of anti-neutrinos because the electron-degeneracy is lifted when the second shock passes through the previously neutronized matter.
Energetic young pulsars and expanding blast waves (supernova remnants, SNRs) are the most visible remains after massive stars, ending their lives, explode in core-collapse supernovae. The Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope has unveiled a radio quiet pulsar located near the center of the compact synchrotron nebula inside the supernova remnant CTA 1. The pulsar, discovered through its gamma-ray pulsations, has a period of 316.86 ms, a period derivative of 3.614 x 10-13 s s-1 . Its characteristic age of 104 years is comparable to that estimated for the SNR. It is conjectured that most unidentified Galactic gamma ray sources associated with star-forming regions and SNRs are such young pulsars.
An overview is given of multiwavelength observations of young supernova remnants, with a focus on the observational signatures of efficient cosmic ray acceleration. Some of the effects that may be attributed to efficient cosmic ray acceleration are the radial magnetic fields in young supernova remnants, magnetic field amplification as determined with X-ray imaging spectroscopy, evidence for large post-shock compression factors, and low plasma temperatures, as measured with high resolution optical/UV/X-ray spectroscopy. Special emphasis is given to spectroscopy of post-shock plasma's, which offers an opportunity to directly measure the post-shock temperature. In the presence of efficient cosmic ray acceleration the post-shock temperatures are expected to be lower than according to standard equations for a strong shock. For a number of supernova remnants this seems indeed to be the case.
We present optical UBVRI photometric and spectroscopic data of the type Ibn supernova SN 2006jc, until the onset of the dust forming phase. The optical spectrum shows a blue continuum and is dominated by the presence of moderately narrow (velocity ~2500 km/s) He I emission lines superimposed over a relatively weak supernova spectrum. The helium lines are produced in a pre-existing He rich circumstellar shell. The observed helium line fluxes indicate the circumstellar shell is dense, with a density of ~10^9 - 10^{10} cm^{-3}. The helium mass in this shell is estimated to be <~0.07 Msun. The optical light curves show a clear signature of dust formation, indicated by a sharp decrease in the magnitudes around day 50, accompanied by a reddening of the colours. The evolution of the optical light curves during the early phase and that of the uvoir bolometric light curve at all phases is reasonably similar to normal Ib/c supernovae.
Diffusive shock acceleration operating at expanding supernova remnant shells is by far the most popular model for the origin of galactic cosmic rays. Despite the general consensus received by this model, an unambiguous and conclusive proof of the supernova remnant hypothesis is still missing. In this context, the recent developments in gamma ray astronomy provide us with precious insights into the problem of the origin of galactic cosmic rays, since production of gamma rays is expected both during the acceleration of cosmic rays at supernova remnant shocks and during their subsequent propagation in the interstellar medium. In particular, the recent detection of a number of supernova remnants at TeV energies nicely fits with the model, but it still does not constitute a conclusive proof of it, mainly due to the difficulty of disentangling the hadronic and leptonic contributions to the observed gamma ray emission. In this paper, the most relevant cosmic-ray-related results of gamma ray astronomy are briefly summarized, and the foreseeable contribution of future gamma ray observations to the final solution of the problem of cosmic ray origin is discussed.
We provide an equation of state for high density supernova matter by applying a momentum-dependent effective interaction. We focus on the study of the equation of state of high-density and high-temperature nuclear matter containing leptons (electrons and neutrinos) under the chemical equilibrium condition. The conditions of charge neutrality and equilibrium under $\beta$-decay process lead first to the evaluation of the lepton fractions and afterwards the evaluation of internal energy, pressure, entropy and in total to the equation of state of hot nuclear matter for various isothermal cases. Thermal effects on the properties and equation of state of nuclear matter are evaluated and analyzed in the framework of the proposed effective interaction model. Since supernova matter is characterized by a constant entropy we also present the thermodynamic properties for isentropic case. Special attention is dedicated to the study of the contribution of the components of $\beta$-stable nuclear matter to the entropy per particle, a quantity of great interest for the study of structure and collapse of supernova.
Supernovae are the dominant energy source for driving turbulence within the interstellar plasma. Until recently, their effects on magnetic field amplification in disk galaxies remained a matter of speculation. By means of self-consistent simulations of supernova-driven turbulence, we find an exponential amplification of the mean magnetic field on timescales of a few hundred million years. The robustness of the observed fast dynamo is checked at different magnetic Reynolds numbers, and we find sustained dynamo action at moderate Rm. This indicates that the mechanism might indeed be of relevance for the real ISM.   Sensing the flow via passive tracer fields, we infer that SNe produce a turbulent alpha effect which is consistent with the predictions of quasilinear theory. To lay a foundation for global mean-field models, we aim to explore the scaling of the dynamo tensors with respect to the key parameters of our simulations. Here we give a first account on the variation with the supernova rate.
The CHASE project started in 2007 with the aim of providing young southern supernovae (SNe) to the Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP) and Millennium Center for Supernova Studies (MCSS) follow-up programs. So far CHASE has discovered 33 SNe with an average of more than 2.5 SNe per month in 2008. In addition to the search we are carrying out a follow-up program targeting bright SNe. Our fully automated data reduction allows us to follow the evolution on the light curve in real time, triggering further observations if something potentially interesting is detected
The supernova paradigm for the origin of galactic cosmic rays can be tested using multifrequency observations of both non-thermal and thermal emission from supernova remnants. The smoking gun of hadronic acceleration in these sources can, however, only be provided by the detection of a high energy neutrino signal. Here we apply the theory of non-linear particle acceleration at supernova shocks to the case of the supernova remnant RX J1713.7-3946, which is becoming the stereotypical example of a possible hadronic accelerator after the detection of high energy gamma rays by the HESS telescope. Our aim is twofold: on one hand we want to address the uncertainties in the discrimination between a hadronic and a leptonic interpretation of the gamma ray emission, mainly related to the possibility of a statistical uncertainty in the energy determination of the gamma ray photons in the TeV region. On the other we want to stress how a km cube neutrino telescope would break the degeneracy and provide evidence for efficient cosmic ray acceleration in RX J1713.7-3946. A 3 sigma evidence would require about two years of observation.
We examine a potential role of the neutrino deuteron reactions in the mechanism of supernova explosion by evaluating the energy transfer cross section for the neutrino heating. We calculate the energy loss rate due to the neutrino absorptions through the charged-current process as well as the neutrino scattering through the neutral-current process. In so doing, we adopt a detailed evaluation of cross sections for the neutrino deuteron reactions with the phenomenological Lagrangian approach. We find the energy transfer cross section for the deuteron is larger than those for $^{3}$H, $^{3}$He and $^{4}$He for neutrino temperatures (T$_\nu$ $\sim 4$ MeV) relevant to supernova core. Because of the low energy threshold for the deuteron breakup, the energy transfer rate rapidly increases from low temperature, T$_\nu$ $\sim 1$ MeV. This suggests that the neutrino deuteron reactions may contribute effectively to the heating mechanism during the dissociation of irons into light elements and nucleons in the shocked material of supernova core.
Despite the importance of Type Ia supernovae as standard candles for cosmology and to the chemical evolution of the Universe, we still have no consistent picture of the nature of these events. Much progress has been made in the hydrodynamical explosion modelling of supernovae Ia in the last few years and fully 3-D explosion models are now available. However those simulations are not directly comparable to observations: to constrain explosion models, radiative transfer calculations must be carried out. We present a new 3-D Monte Carlo radiative transfer code which allows forward modelling of the spectral evolution of Type Ia supernovae from first principles, using hydrodynamical explosion models as input. Here, as a first application, we calculate line-of-sight dependent colour light curves for a toy model of an off-centre explosion.
Since 1997 the neutrino telescope AMANDA at the geographic South Pole has been monitoring our Galaxy for neutrino bursts from supernovae. Triggers were introduced in 2004 to submit burst candidates to the Supernova Early Warning System SNEWS. From 2007 the burst search was extended to the much larger IceCube telescope, which now supersedes AMANDA. By exploiting the low photomultiplier noise in the antarctic ice (on average 280Hz for IceCube), neutrino bursts from nearby supernovae can be identified by the induced collective rise in the pulse rates. Although only a counting experiment, IceCube will provide the world's most precise measurement of the time profile of a neutrino burst near the galactic center. The sensitivity to neutrino properties such as the theta13 mixing angle and the neutrino hierarchy are discussed as well as the possibility to detect the deleptonization burst.
Previous studies of type IIP supernovae have inferred that progenitor masses recovered from hydrodynamic models are higher than 15 Msun. To verify the progenitor mass of this supernova category, we attempt a parameter determination of the well-observed luminous type IIP supernova 2004et. We model the bolometric light curve and the photospheric velocities of SN 2004et by means of hydrodynamic simulations in an extended parameter space. From hydrodynamic simulations and observational data, we infer a presupernova radius of 1500 Rsun, an ejecta mass of 24.5 Msun, an explosion energy of 2.3x10^{51} erg, and a radioactive Ni-56 mass of 0.068 Msun. The estimated progenitor mass on the main sequence is in the range of 25-29 Msun. In addition, we find clear signatures of the explosion asymmetry in the nebular spectra of SN 2004et. The measured progenitor mass of SN 2004et is significantly higher than the progenitor mass suggested by the pre-explosion images. We speculate that the mass inferred from hydrodynamic modeling is overestimated and crucial missing factors are multi-dimensional effects.
The single-degenerate model for the progenitors of type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) is one of the two most popular models, in which a carbon-oxygen white dwarf (CO WD) accretes hydrogen-rich material from its companion, increases its mass to the Chandrasekhar mass limit, and then explodes as a SN Ia. Incorporating the prescription of Hachisu et al. (1999a) for the accretion efficiency into Eggleton's stellar evolution code and assuming that the prescription is valid for \emph{all} metallicities, we carried out a detailed binary evolution study with different metallicities. We show the initial and final parameter space for SNe Ia in a ($\log P-M_{\rm 2}$) plane. The positions of some famous recurrent novae in the ($\log P-M_{\rm 2}$) plane, as well as a supersoft X-ray source (SSS), RX J0513.9-6951 are well explained by our model, and our model can also explain the space velocity and mass of Tycho G, which is now suggested to be the companion star of Tycho's supernova . Our study indicates that the SSS, V Sge, is a potential progenitor of supernovae like SN 2002ic if the delayed dynamical-instability model in Han & Podsiadlowski (2006) is appropriate.
The low-mass X-ray binary microquasar GRO J1655-40 is observed to have a misalignment between the jets and the binary orbital plane. Since the current black hole spin axis is likely to be parallel to the jets, this implies a misalignment between the spin axis of the black hole and the binary orbital plane. It is likely the black holes formed with an asymmetric supernova which caused the orbital axis to misalign with the spin of the stars. We ask whether the null hypothesis that the supernova explosion did not affect the spin axis of the black hole can be ruled out by what can be deduced about the properties of the explosion from the known system parameters. We find that this null hypothesis cannot be disproved but we find that the most likely requirements to form the system include a small natal black hole kick (of a few tens of km/s) and a relatively wide pre-supernova binary. In such cases the observed close binary system could have formed by tidal circularisation without a common envelope phase.
While it is well known that neutrinos are emitted from standard core collapse protoneutron star supernovae, less attention has been focused on neutrinos from accretion disks. These disks occur in some supernovae (i.e. "collapsars") as well as in compact object mergers, and they emit neutrinos with similar properties to those from protoneutron star supernovae. These disks and their neutrinos play an important role in our understanding of gamma ray bursts as well as the nucleosynthesis they produce. We study a disk that forms in the merger of a black hole and a neutron star and examine the neutrino fluxes, luminosities and neutrino surfaces for the disk. We also estimate the number of events that would be registered in current and proposed supernova neutrino detectors if such an event were to occur in the Galaxy.
A nearby core collapse supernova will produce a burst of neutrinos in several detectors worldwide. With reasonably high probability, the Earth will shadow the neutrino flux in one or more detectors. In such a case, for allowed oscillation parameter scenarios, the observed neutrino energy spectrum will bear the signature of oscillations in Earth matter. Because the frequency of the oscillations in energy depends on the pathlength traveled by the neutrinos in the Earth, an observed spectrum contains also information about the direction to the supernova. We explore here the possibility of constraining the supernova location using matter oscillation patterns observed in a detector. Good energy resolution (typical of scintillator detectors), well known oscillation parameters, and optimistically large (but conceivable) statistics are required. Pointing by this method can be significantly improved using multiple detectors located around the globe. Although it is not competitive with neutrino-electron elastic scattering-based pointing with water Cherenkov detectors, the technique could still be useful.
We report the discovery of a type IIn supernova in the low-metallicity dwarf galaxy J1320+2155, with an oxygen abundance 12+logO/H = 8.0+/-0.2. This finding is based on SDSS (February 2008) and 3.5m Apache Point Observatory (February 2009) spectra taken one year apart, and on the observations that: the Hbeta and Halpha emission lines show broad components corresponding to gas expansion velocities of ~1600 km/s; the Balmer decrement is exceeedingly high: the Halpha/Hbeta flux ratio, being more than 30, implies a very dense environment (>10^7 cm^-3); and the Halpha broad luminosity decreases slowly, by only a factor of ~1.8 over the course of a year, typical of the slow luminosity evolution of a type IIn supernova. Several weak coronal lines of [Fe VII] and [Fe X] are also seen in the SDSS spectrum, implying ionization of the pre-shock circumstellar medium by shock-induced X-ray emission. The galaxy J1320+2155 is the first dwarf system ever to be discovered with a type IIn supernova exhibiting coronal lines in its spectrum.
We present an analysis of archival X-ray observations of the Type IIL supernova SN 1979C. We find that its X-ray luminosity is remarkably constant at (6.5+/-0.1) x 10^38 erg/s over a period of 12 years between 1995 and 2007. The high and steady luminosity is considered as possible evidence for a stellar-mass (~ 5-10Msun) black hole accreting material from either a supernova fallback disk or from a binary companion, or possibly from emission from a central pulsar wind nebula. We find that the bright and steady X-ray light curve is not consistent with either a model for a supernova powered by magnetic braking of a rapidly rotating magnetar, or a model where the blast wave is expanding into a dense circumstellar wind.
Predictions of the thermodynamic conditions for phase transitions at high baryon densities and large chemical potentials are currently uncertain and largely phenomenological. Neutrino observations of core-collapse supernovae can be used to constrain the situation. Recent simulations of stellar core collapse that include a description of quark matter predict a sharp burst of anti \nu_e several hundred milliseconds after the prompt \nu_e neutronization burst. We study the observational signatures of that anti \nu_e burst at current neutrino detectors - IceCube and Super-Kamiokande. For a Galactic core-collapse supernova, we find that signatures of the QCD phase transition can be detected, regardless of the neutrino oscillation scenario. The detection would constitute strong evidence of a phase transition in the stellar core, with implications for the equation of state at high matter density and the supernova explosion mechanism.
It has been proposed that the gamma ray burst - supernova connection may manifest itself in a significant fraction of core collapse supernovae possessing mildly relativistic jets that do not break out of the stellar envelope. Neutrinos would provide proof of the existence of these jets. In the present letter we calculate the event rate of ~100 GeV neutrino-induced cascades in km^3 detectors. We also calculate the event rate for ~10 GeV neutrinos of all flavors with the DeepCore low energy extension of IceCube. The added event rate significantly improves the ability of km^3 detectors to search for these gamma-ray dark bursts. For a core collapse supernova at 10 Mpc we find ~4 events expected in DeepCore and ~6 neutrino-induced cascades in IceCube/KM3Net. Observations at ~10 GeV are mostly sensitive to the pion component of the neutrino production in the choked jet, while the ~100 GeV depends on the kaon component. Finally we discuss extensions of the on-going optical follow-up programs by IceCube and Antares to include neutrinos of all flavors at ~10 GeV and neutrino-induced cascades at ~100 GeV energies.
The type Ib supernova 2010O was recently discovered in the interacting starburst galaxy Arp 299. We present an analysis of two archival Chandra X-ray observations of Arp 299, taken before the explosion and show that there is a transient X-ray source at a position consistent with the supernova. Due to the diffuse emission, the background is difficult to estimate. We estimate the flux of the transient from the difference of the two X-ray images and conclude that the transient can be described by a 0.225 keV black body with a luminosity of 2.5+/-0.7 10^{39} erg/s for a distance of 41 Mpc. These properties put the transient in between the Galactic black hole binary XTE J1550-564 and the ultra-luminous X-ray binaries NGC 1313 X-1 and X-2. The high level of X-ray variability associated with the active starburst makes it impossible to rule out a chance alignment. If the source is associated with the supernova, it suggests SN2010O is the explosion of the second star in a Wolf-Rayet X-ray binary, such as Cyg X-3, IC 10 X-1 and NGC 300 X-1.
From a combination of MERLIN (Multi-Element Radio-Linked Interferometer Network) and global VLBI (Very Long Baseline Interferometry) observations of the starburst galaxy M82, images of 36 discrete sources at resolutions ranging from ~3 to ~80 mas at 1.7 GHz are presented. Of these 36 sources, 32 are identified as supernova remnants, 2 are HII regions, and 3 remain unclassified. Sizes, flux densities and radio brightnesses are given for all of the detected sources. Additionally, global VLBI only data from this project are used to image four of the most compact radio sources. These data provide a fifth epoch of VLBI observations of these sources, covering a 19-yr time-line. In particular, the continued expansion of one of the youngest supernova remnants, 43.31+59.3 is discussed. The deceleration parameter is a power-law index used to represent the time evolution of the size of a supernova remnant. For the source 43.31+59.3, a lower limit to the deceleration parameter is calculated to be 0.53+/-0.06, based on a lower limit of the age of this source.
The merger of two white dwarfs (a.k.a. double degenerate merger) has often been cited as a potential progenitor of type Ia supernovae. Here we combine population synthesis, merger and explosion models with radiation-hydrodynamics light-curve models to study the implications of such a progenitor scenario on the observed type Ia supernova population. Our standard model, assuming double degenerate mergers do produce thermonuclear explosions, produces supernova light-curves that are broader than the observed type Ia sample. In addition, we discuss how the shock breakout and spectral features of these double degenerate progenitors will differ from the canonical bare Chandrasekhar-massed explosion models. We conclude with a discussion of how one might reconcile these differences with current observations.
Context: Multiwavelength observations of supernova remnants can be explained within the framework of diffusive shock acceleration theory, which allows effective conversion of the explosion energy into cosmic rays. Although the models of nonlinear shocks describe reasonably well the nonthermal component of emission, certain issues, including the heating of the thermal electron plasma and the related X-ray emission, still remain open.   Methods: Numerical solution of the equations of the Chevalier model for supernova remnant evolution, coupled with Coulomb scattering heating of the electrons.   Results: The electron temperature and the X-ray thermal Bremsstrahlung emission from supernova remnants have been calculated as functions of the relevant parameters. Since only the Coulomb mechanism was considered for electron heating, the values obtained for the electron temperatures should be treated as lower limits. Results from this work can be useful to constrain model parameters for observed SNRs.
We report on sensitive 1.4-GHz VLBI radio observations of the unusually luminous supernova remnant SNR 4449-1 in the galaxy NGC 4449, which gave us the first well-resolved image of this object. The remnant's radio morphology consists of two approximately parallel bright ridges, suggesting similarities to the barrel shape seen for many older Galactic supernova remnants or possibly to SN 1987A. The angular extent of the remnant is 65 x 40 mas, corresponding to (3.7 x 2.3) x 10^{18} (D/3.8 Mpc) cm. We also present a new, high signal-to-noise optical spectrum. By comparing the remnant's linear size to the maximum velocities measured from optical lines, as well as using constraints from historical images, we conclude that the supernova explosion occurred between ~1905 and 1961, likely around 1940. The age of the remnant is therefore likely ~70 yr. We find that SNR 4449-1's shock wave is likely still interacting with the circumstellar rather than interstellar medium.
After the initiation of the explosion of core-collapse supernovae, neutrinos emitted from the nascent neutron star drive a supersonic baryonic outflow. This neutrino-driven wind interacts with the more slowly moving, earlier supernova ejecta forming a wind termination shock (or reverse shock), which changes the local wind conditions and their evolution. Important nucleosynthesis processes (alpha-process, charged-particle reactions, r-process, and vp-process) occur or might occur in this environment. The nucleosynthesis depends on the long-time evolution of density, temperature, and expansion velocity. Here we present two-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations with an approximate description of neutrino-transport effects, which for the first time follow the post-bounce accretion, onset of the explosion, wind formation, and the wind expansion through the collision with the preceding supernova ejecta. Our results demonstrate that the anisotropic ejecta distribution has a great impact on the position of the reverse shock, the wind profile, and the long-time evolution. This suggests that hydrodynamic instabilities after core bounce and the consequential asymmetries may have important effects on the nucleosynthesis-relevant conditions in the neutrino-heated baryonic mass flow from proto-neutron stars.
Progenitors of long GRBs, and core-collapse supernovae in general, may have two separate mechanisms driving the outflows: quasi-isotropic neutrino-driven supernova explosions followed by a highly collimated relativistic outflow driven by the GRB central engine, a black hole or a magnetar. We consider the dynamics of the second GRB-driven explosion propagating through expanding envelope generated by the passage of the primary supernova shock. Beyond the central core, in the region of steep density gradient created by the SN shock breakout, the accelerating secondary quasi-spherical GRB shock become unstable to corrugation and under certain conditions may form a highly collimated jet, a "chimney", when a flow expands almost exclusively along a nearly cylindrically collimated channel. Thus, weakly non-spherical driving and/or non-spherical initial conditions of the wind cavity may produce highly non-spherical, jetted outflows. For a constant luminosity GRB central engine, this occurs for density gradient in the envelope \rho ~ r^{-\omega} steeper than \omega >4.
Future galactic supernovae will provide an extremely long baseline for studying the properties and interactions of neutrinos. In this paper, we discuss the possibility of using such an event to constrain (or discover) the effects of exotic physics in scenarios that are not currently constrained and are not accessible with reactor or solar neutrino experiments. In particular, we focus on the cases of neutrino decay and quantum decoherence. We calculate the expected signal from a core-collapse supernova in both current and future water Cerenkov, scintillating, and liquid argon detectors, and find that such observations will be capable of distinguishing between many of these scenarios. Additionally, future detectors will be capable of making strong, model-independent conclusions by examining events associated with a galactic supernova's neutronization burst.
The implications of a QCD phase transition at high temperatures and densities for core-collapse supernovae are discussed. For a strong first order phase transition to quark matter, various scenarios have been put forward in the literature. Here, detailed numerical simulations including neutrino transport are presented, where it is found that a second shock wave due to the QCD phase transition emerges shortly after bounce. It is demonstrated that such a supernova banging twice results in a second peak in the antineutrino spectrum. This second peak is clearly detectable in present neutrino detectors for a galactic supernova.
We show that when a procedure is made to remove the tension between a supernova Ia (SN Ia) data set and observations from BAO and CMB, there might be the case where the same SN Ia set built with two different light-curve fitters behaves as two separate and distinct supernova sets, and the tension found by some authors between supernova sets actually could be due to tension or inconsistency between fitters. We also show that the information of the fitter used in an SN Ia data set could be relevant to determine whether phantom type models are favored or not when such a set is combined with the BAO/CMB joint parameter.
Theory holds that a star born with an initial mass between about 8 and 140 times the mass of the Sun will end its life through the catastrophic gravitational collapse of its iron core to a neutron star or black hole. This core collapse process is thought to usually be accompanied by the ejection of the star's envelope as a supernova. This established theory is now being tested observationally, with over three dozen core-collapse supernovae having had the properties of their progenitor stars directly measured through the examination of high-resolution images taken prior to the explosion. Here I review what has been learned from these studies and briefly examine the potential impact on stellar evolution theory, the existence of "failed supernovae", and our understanding of the core-collapse explosion mechanism.
It has been known for over 50 years that the radio emission from shell supernova remnants (SNRs) indicates the presence of electrons with energies in the GeV range emitting synchrotron radiation. The discovery of nonthermal X-ray emission from supernova remnants is now 30 years old, and its interpretation as the extension of the radio synchrotron spectrum requires electrons with energies of up to 100 TeV. SNRs are now detected at GeV and TeV photon energies as well. Strong suggestions of the presence of energetic ions exist, but conclusive evidence remains elusive. Several arguments suggest that magnetic fields in SNRs are amplified by orders of magnitude from their values in the ambient interstellar medium. Supernova remnants are thus an excellent laboratory in which to study processes taking place in very high Mach-number shocks. I review the observations of high-energy emission from SNRs, and the theoretical framework in which those observations are interpreted.
Radioactive decays contribute significantly to the re-heating of supernova ejecta. Previous works mainly considered the energy deposited by gamma-rays and positrons produced by 56Ni, 56Co, 57Ni, 57Co, 44Ti, and 44Sc. We point out that Auger and internal conversion electrons constitute an additional heat source. At late times, these electrons can contribute significantly to supernova light curves for reasonable nucleosynthetic yields. In particular, the internal conversion electrons emitted in the decay of 57Co are an important heating channel for supernovae that have become largely transparent to gamma-rays. We show that when the heating by these electrons is accounted for, the slowing down of the light curves of SN 1998bw and SN 2003hv is naturally obtained for typical nucleosynthetic yields. Additionally, we show that for SN 1987A the effects of internal conversion electrons are likely significant for the derivation of 44Ti yields from its late time bolometric light curve.
We present bolometric light curves of Type II-plateau supernovae (SNe II-P) obtained using a newly developed, one-dimensional Lagrangian hydrodynamic code with flux-limited radiation diffusion. Using our code we calculate the bolometric light curve and photospheric velocities of SN1999em obtaining a remarkably good agreement with observations despite the simplifications used in our calculation. The physical parameters used in our calculation are E=1.25 foe, M= 19 M_\odot, R= 800 R_\odot and M_{Ni}=0.056 M_\odot. We find that an extensive mixing of 56Ni is needed in order to reproduce a plateau as flat as that shown by the observations. We also study the possibility to fit the observations with lower values of the initial mass consistently with upper limits that have been inferred from pre-supernova imaging of SN1999em in connection with stellar evolution models. We cannot find a set of physical parameters that reproduce well the observations for models with pre-supernova mass of \leq 12 M_\odot, although models with 14 M_\odot cannot be fully discarded.
We show that the recently observed elemental abundance pattern of the carbon-rich metal-poor Damped Lyman $\alpha$ (DLA) system is in excellent agreement with the nucleosynthesis yields of faint core-collapse supernovae of primordial stars. The observed abundance pattern is not consistent with the nucleosynthesis yields of pair-instability supernovae. The DLA abundance pattern is very similar to that of carbon-rich extremely metal-poor (EMP) stars, and the contributions from low-mass stars and/or binary effects should be very small in DLAs. This suggests that chemical enrichment by the first stars in the first galaxies is driven by core-collapse supernovae from $\sim 20-50 M_\odot$ stars, and also supports the supernova scenario as the enrichment source of EMP stars in the Milky Way Galaxy.
Supernova distances provide a direct probe of cosmic acceleration, constraining dark energy. This leverage increases with survey redshift depth at a rate bounded by the systematic uncertainties. We investigate the impact of a wavelength-dependent, global correlation model of systematics in comparison to the standard local-redshift correlation model. This can arise from subclass uncertainties as features in the supernova spectrum redshift out of the observer photometric filters or spectral range. We explore the impact of such a systematic on ground-based supernova surveys such as Dark Energy Survey and LSST, finding distinctive implications. Extending the wavelength sensitivity to 1.05 microns through "extreme red" CCDs can improve the dark energy figure of merit by up to a factor 2.
At high energies, the hadronic origin of gamma rays from supernova remnants is still debated. Assuming the observed gamma-rays from the Wolf-Rayet supernova remnant Cas A are due to accelerated protons and ions, we predict the nuclear de-excitation line emission arising from interactions with the heavy elements in the supernova ejecta. This illustrative example highlights the importance of MeV gamma ray observations of the hadronic fingerprint of cosmic rays. The lines could be observed in the MeV band with a future space mission such as GRIPS which has been proposed to ESA as an all-sky survey mission with gamma-ray, X-ray and near-infrared telescopes. In MeV gamma rays, its sensitivity will improve by a factor of 40 compared with previous missions.
We explore the effects of collective neutrino flavor oscillations due to neutrino-neutrino interactions on the neutrino heating behind a stalled core-collapse supernova shock. We carry out axisymmetric (2D) radiation-hydrodynamic core-collapse supernova simulations, tracking the first 400 ms of the post-core-bounce evolution in 11.2 solar mass and 15 solar mass progenitor stars. Using inputs from these 2D simulations, we perform neutrino flavor oscillation calculations in multi-energy single-angle and multi-angle single-energy approximations. Our results show that flavor conversions do not set in until close to or outside the stalled shock, enhancing heating by not more than a few percent in the most optimistic case. Consequently, we conclude that the postbounce pre-explosion dynamics of standard core-collapse supernovae remains unaffected by neutrino oscillations. Multi-angle effects in regions of high electron density can further inhibit collective oscillations, strengthening our conclusion.
We present the results of detailed monitoring of the radio emission from the Type Ic supernova SN 1994I from 3 days after optical discovery on 1994 March 31 until eight years later at age 2927 days on 2002 April 05. The data were mainly obtained using the Very Large Array at the five wavelengths, 1.3, 2.0, 3.6, 6.2, and 21 cm, and from the Cambridge 5 km Ryle Telescope at 2.0 cm. Two additional measurements were obtained at millimeter wavelengths. This data set represents the most complete, multifrequency radio observations ever obtained for a Type Ib/c supernova. The radio emission evolves regularly in both time and frequency and is well described by established SN emission/absorption models. It is the first radio supernova with sufficient data to show that it is clearly dominated by the effects of synchrotron self-absorption at early times.
We calculate the evolution of fluorine in the solar neighborhood with the \nu-process of core-collapse supernovae, the results of which are in good agreement with the observations of field stars. The \nu-process operating in supernovae causes the [F/O] ratio to plateau at [O/H] < -1.2, followed by a rapid increase toward [O/H] ~ -0.5 from the contribution of Asymptotic Giant Branch stars. The plateau value of [F/O] depends on the neutrino luminosity released by core-collapse supernovae and may be constrained by using future observations of field stars at low metallicities. For globular clusters, the handful of [F/O] measurements suggest that the relative contribution from low-mass supernovae is smaller in these systems than in the field.
We review the class of galactic supernova remnants which show strong interactions with molecular clouds, revealed through shock-excited hydroxyl masers. These remnants are preferentially found among the known GeV and TeV detections of supernova remnants. It has been argued that the masers trace out the sites of hadronic particle acceleration. We discuss what is known about the physical conditions of these shocked regions and we introduce a potential new maser tracer for identifying the sites of cosmic ray acceleration. This review includes a reasonably complete bibliography for researchers new to the topic of shock-excited masers and supernova remnants.
Based on the largest homogeneously reduced set of Type Ia supernova luminosity data currently available -- the Union2 sample -- we reconstruct the expansion history of the Universe in a model-independent approach. Our method tests the geometry of the Universe directly without reverting to any assumptions made on its energy content. This allows us to constrain Dark Energy models and non-standard cosmologies in a straightforward way. The applicability of the presented method is not restricted to testing cosmological models. It can be a valuable tool for pointing out systematic errors hidden in the supernova data and planning future Type Ia supernova cosmology campaigns.
Titanium-rich subluminous supernovae are rare and challenge current SN nucleosynthesis models. We present a model in which ejecta from a standard Supernova is impacted by a second explosion of the neutron star (a Quark-nova), resulting in spallation reactions that lead to 56Ni destruction and 44Ti creation under the right conditions. Basic calculations of the spallation products shows that a delay between the two explosions of ~ 5 days reproduces the observed abundance of 44Ti in Cas A and explains its low luminosity as a result of the destruction of 56Ni. Our results could have important implications for lightcurves of subluminous as well as superluminous supernovae.
Our ability to study the most remote supernova explosions, crucial for the understanding of the evolution of the high-redshift universe and its expansion rate, is limited by the light collection capabilities of telescopes. However, nature offers unique opportunities to look beyond the range within reach of our unaided instruments thanks to the light-focusing power of massive galaxy clusters. Here we report on the discovery of one of the most distant supernovae ever found, at redshift, z=1.703. Due to a lensing magnification factor of 4.3\pm0.3, we are able to measure a lightcurve of the supernova, as well as spectroscopic features of the host galaxy with a precision comparable to what will otherwise only be possible with future generation telescopes.
Some core-collapse supernovae appear to be hyper-energetic, and a subset of these are aspherical and associated with long GRBs. We use observations of electromagnetic emission from core-collapse supernovae and GRBs to impose constraints on their free energy source as a prior to searches for their gravitational wave emission. We review these events based on a finite efficiency for the conversion of spin energy to magnetic winds powering supernovae. We find that some of the hyper-energetic events cannot be powered by the spindown of rapidly rotating proto-neutron stars by virtue of their limited rotational energy. They can, instead, be produced by the spindown of black holes providing a distinct prospect for gravitational-wave emission of interest to LIGO, Virgo, and the LCGT.
We briefly discuss models of energetic particle acceleration by supernova shock in active starforming regions at different stages of their evolution. Strong shocks may strongly amplify magnetic fields due to cosmic ray driven instabilities. We discuss the magnetic field amplification emphasizing the role of the long-wavelength instabilities. Supernova shock propagating in the vicinity of a powerful stellar wind in a young stellar cluster is argued to increase the maximal CR energies at a given evolution stage of supernova remnant (SNR) and can convert a sizeable fraction of the kinetic energy release into energetic particles.
In the past few years, gamma-ray astronomy has entered a golden age. At TeV energies, only a handful of sources were known a decade ago, but the current generation of ground-based imaging atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes has increased this number to more than one hundred. At GeV energies, the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope has increased the number of known sources by nearly an order of magnitude in its first 2 years of operation. The recent detection and unprecedented morphological studies of gamma-ray emission from shell-type supernova remnants is of great interest, as these analyses are directly linked to the long standing issue of the origin of the cosmic-rays. However, these detections still do not constitute a conclusive proof that supernova remnants accelerate the bulk of Galactic cosmic-rays, mainly due to the difficulty of disentangling the hadronic and leptonic contributions to the observed gamma-ray emission. In this talk, I will review the most relevant cosmic ray related results of gamma ray astronomy concerning supernova remnants.
The quest for the supernova explosion mechanism has been one of the outstanding challenges in computational astrophysics for several decades. Simulations have now progressed to a stage at which the solution appears close and neutrino and gravitational wave signals from self-consistent explosion models are becoming available. Here we focus one of the recent advances in supernova modeling, the inclusion of general relativity in multi-dimensional neutrino hydrodynamics simulations, and present the latest simulation results for an 11.2 and a 15 solar mass progenitor. We also mention 3D effects as another aspect in supernova physics awaiting further, more thorough investigation.
In this paper a new supernova catalogue containing data for 5526 extragalactic supernovae that were discovered up to 2010 December 31 is presented. It combines several catalogues that are currently available online in a consistent and traceable way. During the comparison of the catalogues inconsistent entries were identified and resolved where possible. Remaining inconsistencies are marked transparently and can be easily identified. Thus it is possible to select a high-quality sample in a most simple way. Where available, redshift-based distance estimates to the supernovae were replaced by journal-refereed distances. Examples of statistical studies that are now possible with this new catalogue are presented in this paper.
We report the detection of carbon monoxide (CO) emission from the young supernova remnant Cassiopeia A (Cas A) at wavelengths corresponding to the fundamental vibrational mode at 4.65 micron. We obtained AKARI Infrared Camera spectra towards 4 positions which unambiguously reveal the broad characteristic CO ro-vibrational band profile. The observed positions include unshocked ejecta at the center, indicating that CO molecules form in the ejecta at an early phase. We extracted a dozen spectra across Cas A along the long 1 arcmin slits, and compared these to simple CO emission models in Local Thermodynamic Equilibrium to obtain first-order estimates of the excitation temperatures and CO masses involved. Our observations suggest that significant amounts of carbon may have been locked up in CO since the explosion 330 years ago. Surprisingly, CO has not been efficiently destroyed by reactions with ionized He or the energetic electrons created by the decay of the radiative nuclei. Our CO detection thus implies that less carbon is available to form carbonaceous dust in supernovae than is currently thought and that molecular gas could lock up a significant amount of heavy elements in supernova ejecta.
During the process of collapse of a massive star, a cavity is generated between the central iron core and an outer stellar envelope. The dynamics of this cavity, filled with plasma and magnetic field of the rapidly rotating proto-magnetar's magnetosphere, is believed to be very relevant in understanding supernovae and gamma-ray bursts. The interactions of the pressurized conducting plasma and the magnetic fields are described by a set of magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) equations with poloidal and toroidal plasma flows not aligned with magnetic fields. A sequence of MHD equilibria in response to the increasing plasma pressure in the cavity, by continuous filling from the rotating magnetosphere, is solved to account for asymmetric supernovae, highly collimated gamma-ray burst jets, and also active galactic nucleus plasma torus. It is shown that the magnetosphere of the central compact star is likely the central engine of supernova and gamma-ray burst by feeding them plasma, magnetic energy, and rotational energy.
We analyze 3.5 years of public Fermi/LAT data around the position of the supernova remnant HB 21, where four point-like sources from the 2nd Fermi/LAT catalog are located. We determine that the gamma-ray source is produced by a single extended source. We model the observed morphology as a uniform circle. The spectral energy distribution is best described by a curved power law, with a maximum at 413+-11 MeV. We divide the circle into three regions defined by previously identified shocked molecular clouds, and find that one of these regions has a softer spectrum. The >3 GeV gamma-ray emission of the soft spectrum region is bow-shaped and coincident with the supernova remnant shell seen at radio wavelengths. We suggest that the gamma-ray emission from HB 21 can be understood as a combination of emission from shocked/illuminated molecular clouds, one of them coincident with the supernova remnant shell itself.
Core-collapse supernovae may depend sensitively on charged current neutrino interactions in warm, low density neutron rich matter. A proton in neutron rich matter is more tightly bound than is a neutron. This energy shift \Delta U increases the electron energy in \nu_e + n --> p + e, increasing the available phase space and absorption cross section. Likewise \Delta U decreases the positron energy in \bar \nu_e + p --> n + e^+, decreasing the phase space and cross section. We have calculated \Delta U using a model independent virial expansion and we find \Delta U is much larger, at low densities, than the predictions of many mean field models. Therefore \Delta U could have a significant impact on charged current neutrino interactions in supernovae. Preliminary simulations of the accretion phase of core-collapse supernovae find that \Delta U increases \bar \nu_e energies and decreases the \nu_e luminosity.
We present 12CO J = 2-1 line observations of G54.1+0.3, a composite supernova remnant with a mid-infrared (MIR) loop surrounding the central pulsar wind nebula (PWN). We mapped an area of 12' x 9' around the PWN and its associated MIR loop. We confirm two velocity components that had been proposed to be possibly interacting with the PWN/MIR-loop; the +53 km/s cloud that appears in contact with the eastern boundary of the PWN and the +23 km/s cloud that has CO emission coincident with the MIR loop. We have not found a direct evidence for the interaction in either of these clouds. Instead, we detected an 5'-long arc-like cloud at +15-+23 km/s with a systematic velocity gradient of ~3 km/s/arcmin and broad-line emitting CO gas having widths (FWHM) of <7 km/s in the western interior of the supernova remnant. We discuss their association with the supernova remnant.
To study the capabilities of supernova neutrino detectors, the instantaneous spectra are often represented by a quasi-thermal distribution of the form f(E) = E^alpha e^{-(alpha+1)E/E_{av}} where E_{av} is the average energy and alpha a numerical parameter. Based on a spherically symmetric supernova model with full Boltzmann neutrino transport we have, at a few representative post-bounce times, re-converged the models with vastly increased energy resolution to test the fit quality. For our examples, the spectra are well represented by such a fit in the sense that the counting rates for a broad range of target nuclei, sensitive to different parts of the spectrum, are reproduced very well. Therefore, the mean energy and root-mean-square energy of numerical spectra hold enough information to provide the correct alpha and to forecast the response of multi-channel supernova neutrino detection.
In a sample of elliptical galaxies that span a large range of mass, a previously unused Ca index, CaHK, shows that [Ca/Fe] and [Ca/Mg] systematically decrease with increasing elliptical galaxy mass. Metallicity mixtures, age effects, stellar chromospheric emission effects, and low-mass initial mass function (IMF) boost effects are ruled out as causes. A [Ca/Fe] range of less than 0.3 dex is sufficient to blanket all observations. Feature gradients within galaxies imply a global Ca deficit rather than a radius-dependent phenomenon. Some, but not all, Type II supernova nucleosynthetic yield calculations indicate a decreasing Ca/Fe yield ratio in more massive supernovae, lending possible support to the hypothesis that more massive elliptical galaxies have an IMF that favors more massive stars. No Type II supernova nucleosynthetic yield calculations show significant leverage in the Ca/Fe ratio as a function of progenitor metallicity. Therefore, it seems unlikely that the Ca behavior can be explained as a built-in metallicity effect, and this argues against explanations that vary only the Type II to Type Ia supernova enrichment ratio.
Massive stars (M> 10Msun) end their lives with spectacular explosions due to gravitational collapse. The collapse turns the stars into compact objects such as neutron stars and black holes with the ejection of cosmic rays and heavy elements. Despite the importance of these astrophysical events, the mechanism of supernova explosions has been an unsolved issue in astrophysics. This is because clarification of the supernova dynamics requires the full knowledge of nuclear and neutrino physics at extreme conditions, and large-scale numerical simulations of neutrino radiation hydrodynamics in multi-dimensions. This article is a brief overview of the understanding (with difficulty) of the supernova mechanism through the recent advance of numerical modeling at supercomputing facilities. Numerical studies with the progress of nuclear physics are applied to follow the evolution of compact objects with neutrino emissions in order to reveal the birth of pulsars/black holes from the massive stars.
Type Ia supernovae, sparked off by exploding white dwarfs of mass close to Chandrasekhar limit, play the key role to understand the expansion rate of universe. However, recent observations of several peculiar type Ia supernovae argue for its progenitor mass to be significantly super-Chandrasekhar. We show that strongly magnetized white dwarfs not only can violate the Chandrasekhar mass limit significantly, but exhibit a different mass limit. We establish from foundational level that the generic mass limit of white dwarfs is 2.58 solar mass. This explains the origin of over-luminous peculiar type Ia supernovae. Our finding further argues for a possible second standard candle, which has many far reaching implications, including a possible reconsideration of the expansion history of the universe.
Supernovae of Type IIn (narrow line) appear to be explosions that had strong mass loss before the event, so that the optical luminosity is powered by the circumstellar interaction. If the mass loss region has an optical depth $>c/v_s$, where $v_s$ is the shock velocity, the shock breakout occurs in the mass loss region and a significant fraction of the explosion energy can be radiated. The emission from the superluminous SN 2006gy and the normal luminosity SN 2011ht can plausibly be attributed to shock breakout in a wind, with SN 2011ht being a low energy event. Superluminous supernovae of Type I may derive their luminosity from interaction with a mass loss region of limited extent. However, the distinctive temperature increase to maximum luminosity has not been clearly observed in Type I events. Suggested mechanisms for the strong mass loss include pulsational pair instability, gravity-waves generated by instabilities in late burning phases, and binary effects.
The discovery of supernovae associated with long-duration gamma ray burst observations is primary evidence that the progenitors of these outbursts are massive stars. One of the principle mysteries in understanding these progenitors has been the fact that all of these gamma-ray burst associated supernovae are type Ic supernovae, with no evidence of helium in the stellar atmosphere. Many studies have focused on whether or not this helium is simply hidden from spectral analyses. In this paper, we show results from recent stellar models using new convection algorithms based on our current understanding of stellar mixing. We demonstrate that enhanced convection may lead to severe depletion of stellar helium layers, suggesting that the helium is not observed simply because it is not in the star. We also present light-curves and spectra of these compact helium-depleted stars, compared to models with more conventional helium layers.
Several tens of hyper-velocity stars (HVSs) have been discovered escaping our Galaxy. These stars share a common origin in the Galactic centre and are distributed anisotropically in Galactic longitude and latitude. We examine the possibility that HVSs may be created as the result of supernovae occurring within binary systems in a disc of stars around Sgr A* over the last 100 Myr. Monte Carlo simulations show that the rate of binary disruption is ~10^-4 yr^-1, comparable to that of tidal disruption models. The supernova-induced HVS production rate (\Gamma_HVS) is significantly increased if the binaries are hardened via migration through a gaseous disc. Moderate hardening gives \Gamma_HVS ~ 2*10^-7 yr^-1 and an estimated population of ~20 HVSs in the last 100 Myr. Supernova-induced HVS production requires the internal and external orbital velocity vectors of the secondary binary component to be aligned when the binary is disrupted. This leaves an imprint of the disc geometry on the spatial distribution of the HVSs, producing a distinct anisotropy.
Among all known young nearby neutron stars, we search for the neutron star that was born in the same supernova event that formed the Antlia supernova remnant (SNR). We also look for a runaway star that could have been the former companion to the neutron star (if it exists) and then got ejected due to the same supernova. We find the pulsar PSR J0630-2834 to be the best candidate for a common origin with the Antlia SNR. In that scenario the SNR is ~1.2 Myr old and is presently located at a distance of ~138 pc. We consider the runaway star HIP 47155 a former companion candidate to PSR J0630-2834. The encounter time and place is consistent with both stars being ejected from the Antlia SNR. We measured the radial velocity of HIP 47155 as 32.42 +/- 0.70km/s.
We present integral-field spectroscopic observations with the VIMOS-IFU at the VLT of fast (2000-3000 km/s) Balmer-dominated shocks surrounding the northwestern rim of the remnant of supernova 1006. The high spatial and spectral resolution of the instrument enable us to show that the physical characteristics of the shocks exhibit a strong spatial variation over few atomic scale lengths across 133 sky locations. Our results point to the presence of a population of non-thermal protons (10-100 keV) which might well be the seed particles for generating high-energy cosmic rays. We also present observations of Tycho's supernova remnant taken with the narrow-band tunable filter imager OSIRIS at the GTC and the Fabry-Perot interferometer GHaFaS at the WHT to resolve respectively the broad and narrow H\alpha\ lines across a large part of the remnant.
The identity of Type Ia supernova progenitors remains a mystery, with various lines of evidence pointing towards either accretion from a non-degenerate companion, or the rapid merger of two degenerate stars leading to the thermonuclear destruction of a white dwarf. In this paper we spectroscopically scrutinize 24 of the brightest stars residing in the central 38" x 38" of the SN 1604 (Kepler) supernova remnant to search for a possible surviving companion star. We can rule out, with high certainty, a red giant companion star - a progenitor indicated by some models of the supernova remnant. Furthermore, we find no star that exhibits properties uniquely consistent with those expected of a donor star down to L>10Lsun. While the distribution of star properties towards the remnant are consistent with unrelated stars, we identify the most promising candidates for further astrometric and spectroscopic follow-up. Such a program would either discover the donor star, or place strong limits on progenitor systems to luminosities with L<<Lsun.
Composite supernova remnants consist of a pulsar wind nebula located inside a shell-type remnant. The presence of a shell has implications on the evolution of the nebula, although the converse is generally not true. The purpose of this paper is two-fold. The first aim is to determine the effect of the pulsar's initial luminosity and spin-down rate, the supernova ejecta mass, and density of the interstellar medium on the evolution of a spherically-symmetric, composite supernova remnant expanding into a homogeneous medium. The second aim is to investigate the evolution of the magnetic field in the pulsar wind nebula when the the composite remnant expands into a non-uniform interstellar medium. The Euler conservation equations for inviscid flow, together with the magnetohydrodynamic induction law in the kinematic limit, are solved numerically for a number of scenarios where the ratio of magnetic to particle energy is $\sigma < 0.01$. The simulations in the first part of the paper is solved in a one-dimensional configuration. In the second part of the paper, the effect of an inhomogeneous medium on the evolution is studied using a two-dimensional, axis-symmetric configuration.
Before 1998 the universe expansion was thought to be slowing down. After 1998 the universe expansion is thought to be accelerating up. This change of the belief is motivated by the observed brightness of the high redshift supernova Ia fainter than expected. In this paper it is argued that this change of the belief is not necessary. There is a more reasonable explanation for the observed brightness of the supernovae Ia fainter than expected. That is: the universe space filled with the tenuous ionized gas; the Thomson Effect of free electron in the ionized gas caused the observed brightness of the high redshift supernova Ia fainter than expected. The observations of Warm-Hot Intergalactic Medium (WHIM) support this explanation. The universe space filled with tenuous ionized gas explanation will lead to the puzzle of the dark matter and dark energy disappeared simultaneously
Supernovae and their remnants are believed to be prodigious sources of Galactic cosmic rays and interstellar dust. Understanding the mechanisms behind their surprisingly high production rate is helped by the study of nearby young supernova remnants. There has been none better in modern times than SN1987A, for which radio observations have been made for over a quarter of a century. We review extensive observations made with the Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) at centimetre wavelengths. Emission at frequencies from 1 to 100 GHz is dominated by synchrotron radiation from an outer shock front which has been growing exponentially in strength from day 3000, and is currently sweeping around the circumstellar ring at about 4000 km s$^{-1}$. Three dimensional models of the propagation of the shock into the circumstellar medium are able to reproduce the main observational features of the remnant, and their evolution. We find that up to 4% of the electrons encountered by the shock are accelerated to relativistic energies. High-frequency ALMA observations will break new ground in the understanding of dust and molecule production.
The use of advanced statistical analysis tools is crucial in order to improve cosmological parameter estimates via removal of systematic errors and identification of previously unaccounted for cosmological signals. Here we demonstrate the application of a new fully-Bayesian method, the internal robustness formalism, to scan for systematics and new signals in the recent supernova Ia Union compilations. Our analysis is tailored to maximize chances of detecting the anomalous subsets by means of a variety of sorting algorithms. We analyse supernova Ia distance moduli for effects depending on angular separation, redshift, surveys and hemispherical directions. The data have proven to be robust within 2 sigma, giving an independent confirmation of successful removal of systematics-contaminated supernovae. Hints of new cosmology, as for example the anisotropies reported by Planck, do not seem to be reflected in the supernova Ia data.
Recently, Weinberg proposed a scenario where Goldstone bosons may be masquerading as fractional cosmic neutrinos. We calculate the energy loss rates through the emission of these Goldstone bosons in a post-collapse supernova core. Invoking the well established emissivity bound from the Supernova 1987A observations and simulations, we find that nuclear bremsstrahlung processes can notably impose a bound on the Goldstone boson coupling to the Standard Model Higgs, $g$, dependent on the mass of the associated radial field, $m_r$. For $m_r$ large enough compared with the temperature in the post-collapse supernova core, our bound is $|g| \lesssim 0.011\, (m_r / 500~{\rm MeV})^2$, very competitive to that derived from collider experiments.
We show that the low ratios of $\alpha$ elements (Mg, Si, and Ca) to Fe recently found for a small fraction of extremely metal-poor stars can be naturally explained with the nucleosynthesis yields of core-collapse supernovae, i.e., $13-25M_\odot$ supernovae, or hypernovae. For the case without carbon enhancement, the ejected iron mass is normal, consistent with observed light curves and spectra of nearby supernovae. On the other hand, the carbon enhancement requires much smaller iron production, and the low [$\alpha$/Fe] of carbon enhanced metal-poor stars can also be reproduced with $13-25M_\odot$ faint supernovae or faint hypernovae. Iron-peak element abundances, in particular Zn abundances, are important to put further constraints on the enrichment sources from galactic archaeology surveys.
Supernovae are Nature's high-energy, high density laboratory experiments, reaching densities in excess of nuclear densities and temperatures above 10MeV. Astronomers have built up a suite of diagnostics to study these supernovae. If we can utilize these diagnostics, and tie them together with a theoretical understanding of supernova physics, we can use these cosmic explosions to study the nature of matter at these extreme densities and temperatures. Capitalizing on these diagnostics will require understanding a wide range of additional physics. Here we review the diagnostics and the physics needed to use them to learn about the supernova engine, and ultimate nuclear physics.
Using $5.4$ year Fermi-LAT data, we report the detection of GeV $\gamma$-ray emission from the shell-type supernova remnant RCW 86 (G315.4-2.3) with a significance of $\sim5.1\sigma$. The data slightly favors an extended emission of this supernova remnant. The spectral index of RCW 86 is found to be very hard, $\Gamma\sim1.4$, in the $0.4$ to $300$ GeV range. A one zone leptonic model can well fit the multi-wavelength data from radio to very high energy $\gamma$-rays. The very hard GeV $\gamma$-ray spectrum and the inferred low gas density seem to disfavor the hadronic origin of the $\gamma$-rays. The $\gamma$-ray behavior of RCW 86 is very similar to several other TeV shell-type supernova remnants, e.g., RX J1713.7-3946, RX J0852.0-4622, SN 1006 and HESS J1731-347.
The absolute-magnitude distributions of seven supernova types are presented. The data used here were primarily taken from the Asiago Supernova Catalogue, but were supplemented with additional data. We accounted for both foreground and host-galaxy extinction. A bootstrap method is used to correct the samples for Malmquist bias. Separately, we generate volume-limited samples, restricted to events within 100 Mpc. We find that the superluminous events (M_B < -21) make up only about 0.1% of all supernovae in the bias-corrected sample. The subluminous events (M_B > -15) make up about 3%. The normal Ia distribution was the brightest with a mean absolute blue magnitude of -19.25. The IIP distribution was the dimmest at -16.75.
Supernovae constitute a critical source of energy input to the interstellar medium (ISM). In this short review, we focus on their latest phase of evolution, the supernova remnants (SNRs). We present observations of three old SNRs that have reached the phase where they interact with the ambient ISM: W28, IC443, and 3C391. We show that such objects make up clean laboratories to constrain the physical and chemical processes at work in molecular shock environments. Our studies subsequently allow us to quantify the impact of SNRs on their environment in terms of mass, momentum, and energy dissipation. In turn, their contribution to the energy balance of galaxies can be assessed. Their potential to trigger a further generation of star formation can also be investigated. Finally, our studies provide strong support for the interpretation of gamma-ray emission in SNRs, a crucial step to answer questions related to cosmic rays population and acceleration.
We use the Sloan Digital Sky Survey II Supernova Survey (SDSS-II SNS) data to measure the volumetric core collapse supernova (CCSN) rate in the redshift range (0.03<z<0.09). Using a sample of 89 CCSN we find a volume-averaged rate of (1.06 +/- 0.19) x 10**(-4)/(yr Mpc**3) at a mean redshift of 0.072 +/- 0.009. We measure the CCSN luminosity function from the data and consider the implications on the star formation history.
We further investigate slowing down of acceleration of the universe scenario for five parametrizations of the equation of state of dark energy using four sets of supernovae data. In a maximal probability analysis we also use the baryon acoustic oscillation and cosmic microwave background observations. We found the low redshift transition of the deceleration parameter appears, independently of the parametrization, using supernovae data alone except for the Union 2.1 sample. This feature disappears once we combine the supernova data with high redshift data. We conclude that the rapid variation of the deceleration parameter is independent of the parametrization. We also found more evidence for a tension among the supernovae samples, as well as for the low and high redshift data.
Type-Ia supernovae result from binary systems that include a carbon-oxygen white dwarf, and these thermonuclear explosions typically produce 0.5 M_solar of radioactive 56Ni. The 56Ni is commonly believed to be buried deeply in the expanding supernova cloud. Surprisingly, in SN2014J we detected the lines at 158 and 812 keV from 56Ni decay ({\tau}~8.8 days) earlier than the expected several-week time scale, only ~20 days after the explosion, and with flux levels corresponding to roughly 10% of the total expected amount of 56Ni. Some mechanism must break the spherical symmetry of the supernova, and at the same time create a major amount of 56Ni at the outskirts. A plausible explanation is that a belt of helium from the companion star is accreted by the white dwarf, where this material explodes and then triggers the supernova event.
The hypothetical massive dark photon ($\gamma'$) which has kinetic mixing with the SM photon can decay electromagnetically to $e^+e^-$ pairs if its mass $m$ exceeds $2m_e$ and otherwise into three SM photons. These decays yield cosmological and supernovae associated signatures. We briefly discuss these signatures, particularly in connection with the supernova SN1987A and delineate the extra constraints that may then arise on the mass and mixing parameter of the dark photon. In particular, we find that for dark photon mass $m_{\gamma'}$ in the 5-20 MeV range, arguments based on supernova 1987A observations lead to a bound on $\epsilon$ which is about 300 times stronger than the presently existing bounds based on energy loss arguments.
We conduct numerical simulations of the interacting ejecta from an exploding CO white dwarf (WD) with a He WD donor in the double-detonation scenario for Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia), and study the possibility of exploding the companion WD. We also study the long time imprint of the collision on the supernova remnant. When the donor He WD has a low mass, M_WD = 0.2Msun, it is at a distance of ~ 0.08Rsun from the explosion, and helium is not ignited. The low mass He WD casts an 'ejecta shadow' behind it. By evolving the ejecta for longer times, we find that the outer parts of the shadowed side are fainter and its boundary with the ambient gas is somewhat flat. More massive He WD donors, M_WD ~ 0.4Msun, must be closer to the CO WD to transfer mass. At a distance of a < 0.045Rsun helium is detonated and the He WD explodes, leading to a triple detonation scenario. In the explosion of the donor WD approximately 0.15Msun of unburned helium is ejected. This might be observed as a peculiar type Ib supernova.
The next time a core-collapse supernova (SN) explodes in our galaxy, vari- ous detectors will be ready and waiting to detect its emissions of gravitational waves (GWs) and neutrinos. Current numerical simulations have successfully introduced multi-dimensional effects to produce exploding SN models, but thus far the explosion mechanism is not well understood. In this paper, we focus on an investigation of progenitor core rotation via comparison of the start time of GW emission and that of the neutronization burst. The GW and neutrino de- tectors are assumed to be, respectively, the KAGRA detector and a co-located gadolinium-loaded water Cherenkov detector, either EGADS or GADZOOKS!. Our detection simulation studies show that for a nearby supernova (0.2 kpc) we can confirm the lack of core rotation close to 100% of the time, and the presence of core rotation about 90% of the time. Using this approach there is also po- tential to confirm rotation for considerably more distant Milky Way supernova explosions.
We present 2D simulations of pair-instability supernovae considering rapid rotation during their explosion phases. Recent studies of the Pop III star formation suggested that these stars could be born with a mass scale about 100 Msun and with a strong rotation. Based on stellar evolution models, these massive Pop III stars might have died as highly energetic pair-instability supernovae. We perform 2D calculations to investigate the impact of rotation on pair-instability supernovae. Our results suggest that rotation leads to an aspherical explosion due to an anisotropic collapse. If the first stars have a 50% of keplerian rotational rate of the oxygen core before their pair-instability explosions, the overall Ni production can be significantly reduced by about two orders of magnitude. An extreme case of 100% keplerian rotational rate shows an interesting feature of fluid instabilities along the equatorial plane caused by non-synchronized and non-isotropic ignitions of explosions, so that the shocks run into the in-falling gas and generate the Richtmyer--Meshkov instability.
I show that the circumstellar matter (CSM) of the type Ia supernova 2014J is too massive and its momentum too large to be accounted for by any but the core-degenerate (CD) scenario for type Ia supernovae. Assuming the absorbing gas is of CSM origin, the several shells responsible of the absorption potassium lines are accounted for by a mass loss episode from a massive asymptotic giant branch star during a common envelope phase with a white dwarf companion. The time-varying potassium lines can be accounted for by ionization of neutral potassium and the Na-from-dust absorption (NaDA) model. Before explosion some of the potassium resides in the gas phase and some in dust. Weakening in absorption strength is caused by potassium-ionizing radiation of the supernova, while release of atomic potassium from dust increases the absorption. I conclude that if the absorbing gas originated from the progenitor of SN 2014J, then a common envelope phase took place about 15,000 years ago, leading to the merging of the core with the white dwarf companion, i.e., the core-degenerate scenario. Else, the absorbing material is of interstellar medium origin.
From a sample of 12 well-observed Type Ia supernovae, we find clear evidence of correlations between early phase (U-B), (V-R), and (V-I) colors and the velocity shifts of the [Fe II] \lambda 7155 and [Ni II] \lambda 7378 nebular lines measured from late-phase spectra. As these lines are thought to trace the ashes of the initial deflagration process, our findings provide additional support to the new paradigm of off-center explosions in Type Ia supernovae, and we interpret these correlations as viewing angle effects in the observed colors. We also show that the nebular velocity shifts are related to the strength and width of the Ca II H&K and IR-triplet lines near-maximum light. The evidence presented here implies that the viewing angle must be taken into account when deriving extinction values and distances in future cosmological studies based on Type Ia supernovae.
The mass distribution of neutron stars and stellar-mass black holes provides vital clues into the nature of stellar core collapse and the physical engine responsible for supernova explosions. Using recent advances in our understanding of supernova engines, we derive mass distributions of stellar compact remnants. We provide analytical prescriptions for compact object masses for major population synthesis codes. In an accompanying paper, Belczynski et al., we demonstrate that these qualitatively new results for compact objects can explain the observed gap in the remnant mass distribution between ~2-5 solar masses and that they place strong constraints on the nature of the supernova engine. Here, we show that advanced gravitational radiation detectors (like LIGO/VIRGO or the Einstein Telescope) will be able to further test the supernova explosion engine models once double black hole inspirals are detected.
It is suggested in observations of supernova remnants that a number of large- and small-scale structures form at various points in the explosion. Multidimensional modeling of core-collapse supernovae has been undertaken since SN1987A, and both simulations and observations suggest/show that Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities during the explosion is a main driver for the formation of structure in the remnants.   We present a case study of structure formation in 3D in a \msol{15} supernova for different parameters. We investigate the effect of moderate asymmetries and different resolutions of the formation and morphology of the RT unstable region, and take first steps at determining typical physical quantities (size, composition) of arising clumps. We find that in this progenitor the major RT unstable region develops at the He/OC interface for all cases considered. The RT instabilities result in clumps that are overdense by 1-2 orders of magnitude with respect to the ambient gas, have size scales on the level of a few % of the remnant diameter, and are not diffused after the first $\sim30$ yrs of the remnant evolution, in the absence of a surrounding medium.
The neutrino-heating mechanism remains a viable possibility for the cause of the explosion in a wide mass range of supernova progenitors. This is demonstrated by recent two-dimensional hydrodynamic simulations with detailed, energy-dependent neutrino transport. Neutrino-driven explosions were not only found for stars in the range of 8-10 solar masses with ONeMg cores and in case of the iron core collapse of a progenitor with 11 solar masses, but also for a ``typical'' progenitor model of 15 solar masses. For such more massive stars, however, the explosion occurs significantly later than so far thought, and is crucially supported by large-amplitude bipolar oscillations due to the nonradial standing accretion shock instability (SASI), whose low (dipole and quadrupole) modes can develop large growth rates in conditions where convective instability is damped or even suppressed. The dominance of low-mode deformation at the time of shock revival has been recognized as a possible explanation of large pulsar kicks and of large-scale mixing phenomena observed in supernovae like SN 1987A.
Collective flavor oscillations driven by neutrino-neutrino self interaction inside core-collapse supernovae have now been shown to bring drastic changes in the resultant neutrino fluxes. This would in turn significantly affect the diffuse supernova neutrino background (DSNB), created by all core-collapse supernovae that have exploded in the past. In view of these collective effects, we re-analyze the potential of detecting the DSNB in currently running and planned large-scale detectors meant for detecting both electron neutrinos and antineutrinos. The next generation detectors should be able to observe DSNB fluxes. Under certain conducive conditions, one could learn about neutrino parameters. For instance, it might be possible to determine the neutrino mass hierarchy, even if theta_{13} is almost zero.
The energy conditions play an important role in the description of some important properties of the Universe, including the current accelerating expansion phase and the possible recent phase of super-acceleration. In a recent work we have provided a detailed study of the energy conditions for the recent past by deriving bounds from energy conditions and by making the confrontation of the bounds with supernovae data. Here, we extend and update these results in two different ways. First, by carrying out a new statistical analysis for $q(z)$ estimates needed for the confrontation between the bounds and supernovae data. Second, by providing a new picture of the energy conditions fulfillment and violation in the light of the recently compiled Union set of 307 type Ia supernovae and by using two different statistical approaches.
We suggest that non-thermal emission can be produced by multiple scatterings of the photons between the supernova ejecta and pre-shock material in supernova shock breakout. Such bulk-Comptonization process may significantly change the original thermal photon spectrum, forming a power-law non-thermal component at higher energies. We then show that the luminous X-ray outburst XRO081009 associated with SN2008D is likely to be such shock breakout emission from an ordinary type Ib/c supernova.
We present observational constraints on the nature of core-collapse supernovae through an investigation into their radial distributions with respect to those of young and old stellar populations within their host galaxies, as traced by H-alpha emission and R-band light respectively. We discuss results and the implications they have on the nature of supernova progenitors, for a sample of 177 core-collapse supernovae. We find that the radial positions of the overall core-collapse population closely follow the radial distribution of H-alpha emission, implying that both are excellent tracers of star formation within galaxies. Within this overall distribution we find that there is a central deficit of SNII which is offset by a central excess of SNIb/c. This implies a strong metallicity dependence on the relative production of the two types, with SNIb/c arising from higher metallicity progenitors than SNII. Separating the SNIb/c into individual classes we find that a trend emerges in terms of progenitor metallicity going from SNII through SNIb to SNIc, with the latter arising from the highest metallicity progenitors.
We show that a spherically symmetric perturbation of a dust dominated $\Omega=1$ FRW universe in the Newtonian gauge can lead to an apparent acceleration of standard candles and provide a fit to the magnitude-redshift relation inferred from the supernovae data, while the perturbation in the gravitational potential remains small at all scales. We also demonstrate that the supernovae data does not necessarily imply the presence of some additional non-perturbative contribution by showing that any Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi model fitting the supernovae data (with appropriate initial conditions) will be equivalent to a perturbed FRW spacetime along the past light cone.
We argue that the small fraction of neutrinos that undergo direction-changing scattering outside of the neutrinosphere could have significant influence on neutrino flavor transformation in core-collapse supernova environments. We show that the standard treatment for collective neutrino flavor transformation is adequate at late times, but could be inadequate in the crucial shock revival/explosion epoch of core-collapse supernovae, where the potentials that govern neutrino flavor evolution are affected by the scattered neutrinos. Taking account of this effect, and the way it couples to entropy and composition, will require a new paradigm in supernova modeling.
The stationary accretion shock instability (SASI) plays a central role in modern simulations of the explosion phase of core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe). It may be key to realizing neutrino powered explosions, and possibly links birth properties of pulsars (e.g., kick, spin, and magnetic field) to supernova dynamics. Using high-resolution magnetohydrodynamic simulations, we study the development of turbulence, and subsequent amplification of magnetic fields in a simplified model of the post-bounce core-collapse supernova environment. Turbulence develops from secondary instabilities induced by the SASI. Our simulations suggest that the development of turbulence plays an important role for the subsequent evolution of the SASI. The turbulence also acts to amplify weak magnetic fields via a small-scale dynamo.
We present an analysis of 7Li/6Li isotope ratios along four sight lines that probe diffuse molecular gas near the supernova remnant IC 443. Recent gamma-ray observations have revealed the presence of shock-accelerated cosmic rays interacting with the molecular cloud surrounding the remnant. Our results indicate that the 7Li/6Li ratio is lower in regions more strongly affected by these interactions, a sign of recent Li production by cosmic rays. We find that 7Li/6Li ~ 7 toward HD 254755, which is located just outside the visible edge of IC 443, while 7Li/6Li ~ 3 along the line of sight to HD 43582, which probes the interior region of the supernova remnant. No evidence of 7Li synthesis by neutrino-induced spallation is found in material presumably contaminated by the ejecta of a core-collapse supernova. The lack of a neutrino signature in the 7Li/6Li ratios near IC 443 is consistent with recent models of Galactic chemical evolution, which suggest that the nu-process plays only a minor role in Li production.
The Italian communities engaged in Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB) and supernova research have been using actively the ESO telescopes and have contributed to improve and refine the observing techniques and even to guide the characteristics and performances of the instruments that were developed. Members of these two communities have recently found ground for a close collaboration on the powerful supernovae that underlie some GRBs. I will review the programs that have led to some important discoveries and milestones on thermonuclear and core-collapse supernovae and on GRBs.
We present observations of SDF-05M05, an unusual optical transient discovered in the Subaru Deep Field (SDF). The duration of the transient is > ~800 d in the observer frame, and the maximum brightness during observation reached approximately 23 mag in the i' and z' bands. The faint host galaxy is clearly identified in all 5 optical bands of the deep SDF images. The photometric redshift of the host yields z~0.6 and the corresponding absolute magnitude at maximum is ~-20. This implies that this event shone with an absolute magnitude brighter than -19 mag for approximately 300 d in the rest frame, which is significantly longer than a typical supernova and ultra-luminous supernova. The total radiated energy during our observation was 1x10^51 erg. The light curves and color evolution are marginally consistent with some of luminous IIn supernova. We suggest that the transient may be a unique and peculiar supernova at intermediate redshift.
The IceCube detector, located at the South Pole, is discussed as a detector for core collapse supernovae. The large flux of $\bar{\nu}_{e}$ from a Galactic supernova gives rise to Cherenkov light from positrons and electrons created in neutrino interactions which increase the overall count rate of the photomultipliers significantly. We will give an overview of the standard, count rate based, method for supernova detection and present the development of a novel technique. This technique uses coincident hits to extract additional information such as the average energy and spectral features. The potential of this technique increases with a higher sensor density, such as foreseen in projected extensions of IceCube/DeepCore.
Supernova remnants are among the most spectacular examples of astrophysical pistons in our cosmic neighborhood. The gas expelled by the supernova explosion is launched with velocities ~ 1000 km/s into the ambient, tenuous interstellar medium, producing shocks that excite hydrogen lines. We have used an optical integral-field spectrograph to obtain high-resolution spatial-spectral maps that allow us to study in detail the shocks in the northwestern rim of supernova 1006. The two-component H\alpha\ line is detected at 133 sky locations. Variations in the broad line widths and the broad-to-narrow line intensity ratios across tens of atomic mean free paths suggest the presence of suprathermal protons, the potential seed particles for generating high-energy cosmic-rays.
Population III supernovae have been the focus of growing attention because of their potential to directly probe the properties of the first stars, particularly the most energetic events that can be seen at the edge of the observable universe. But until now pair-pulsation supernovae, in which explosive thermonuclear burning in massive stars fails to unbind them but can eject their outer layers into space, have been overlooked as cosmic beacons at the earliest redshifts. These shells can later collide and, like Type IIn supernovae, produce superluminous events in the UV at high redshifts that could be detected in the near infrared today. We present numerical simulations of a 110 M$_{\odot}$ pair-pulsation explosion done with the Los Alamos radiation hydrodynamics code RAGE. We find that collisions between consecutive pair pulsations are visible in the near infrared out to z $\sim$ 15 - 20 and can probe the earliest stellar populations at cosmic dawn.
Supernova remnant Kes 17 (SNR G304.6+0.1) is one of a few but growing number of remnants detected across the electromagnetic spectrum. In this paper, we analyze recent radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray observations of this object, determining that efficient cosmic ray acceleration is required to explain its broadband non-thermal spectrum. These observations also suggest that Kes 17 is expanding inside a molecular cloud, though our determination of its age depends on whether thermal conduction or clump evaporation is primarily responsible for its center-filled thermal X-ray morphology. Evidence for efficient cosmic ray acceleration in Kes 17 supports recent theoretical work that the strong magnetic field, turbulence, and clumpy nature of molecular clouds enhances cosmic ray production in supernova remnants. While additional observations are needed to confirm this interpretation, further study of Kes 17 is important for understanding how cosmic rays are accelerated in supernova remnants.
The Star of Bethlehem is only known from a few verses in the Gospel of Matthew, with the Star inspiring and leading the Magi (i.e., Persian astrologers) to Jerusalem and ultimately worshipping the young Jesus Christ in Bethlehem. In the last four centuries, astronomers have put forth over a dozen greatly different naturalistic explanations, all involving astronomical events, often a bright nova, supernova, or comet. This paper will evaluate one prominent recent proposal, that the Star was a 'recurrent nova' now catalogued as DO Aquilae, and provide three refutations. In particular, (1) DO Aql is certainly not a recurrent nova, but rather an ordinary nova with a recurrence time scale of over a million years, (2) in its 1925 eruption, DO Aql certainly never got brighter than 8.5 mag, and the physics of the system proves that it could never get to the required luminosity of a supernova, and (3) the Magi were astrologers who had no recognition or interpretation for novae (or supernovae or comets) so any such event is completely irrelevant and meaningless to them.
Neutrino emissions from electron/positron capture on the deuteron and the nucleon-nucleon fusion processes in the surface region of a supernova core are studied. These weak processes are evaluated in the standard nuclear physics approach, which consists of one-nucleon and two-nucleon-exchange currents and nuclear wave functions generated by a high precision nucleon-nucleon potential. In addition to the cross sections for these processes involving the deuteron, we present neutrino emissivities due to these processes calculated for typical profiles of core-collapsed supernovae. These novel neutrino emissivities are compared with the standard neutrino emission mechanisms. We find that the neutrino emissivity due to the electron capture on the deuteron is comparable to that on the proton in the deuteron abundant region. The implications of the new channels involving deuterons for the supernova mechanism are discussed.
Firestone (2014) asserted evidence for numerous (23) nearby (d<300 pc) supernovae within the Middle and Late Pleistocene. If true, this would have strong implications for the irradiation of the Earth; at this rate, mass extinction level events due to supernovae would be more frequent than 100 Myr. However, there are numerous errors in the application of past research. The paper overestimates likely nitrate and 14C production from moderately nearby supernovae by about four orders of magnitude. Moreover, the results are based on wrongly selected (obsolete) nitrate and 14C datasets. The use of correct and up-to-date datasets does not confirm the claimed results. The claims in the paper are invalidated.
The Type Ia supernova SN 2011fe is one of the closest supernovae of the past decades. Due to its proximity and low dust extinction, this object provides a very rare opportunity to study the extremely late time evolution ($>900$ days) of thermonuclear supernovae. In this Letter, we present our photometric data of SN 2011fe taken at an unprecedented late epoch of $\approx 930$ days with GMOS-N mounted on the Gemini North telescope ($g=23.43 \pm 0.28$, $r=24.14 \pm 0.14$, $i=23.91 \pm 0.18$, and $z=23.90 \pm 0.17$) to study the energy production and retention in the ejecta of SN 2011fe. Together with previous measurements by other groups, our result suggests that the optical supernova light curve can still be explained by the full thermalization of the decay positrons of Co56. This is in spite of theoretical predicted effects (e.g. infrared catastrophe, positron escape, and dust) that advocate a substantial energy redistribution and/or loss via various processes that result in a more rapid dimming at these very late epochs.
Dust formation in supernova ejecta is currently the leading candidate to explain the large quantities of dust observed in the distant, early Universe. However, it is unclear whether the ejecta-formed dust can survive the hot interior of the supernova remnant (SNR). We present infrared observations of ~0.02 $M_\odot$ of warm (~100 K) dust seen near the center of the ~10,000 yr-old Sgr A East SNR at the Galactic center. Our findings signify the detection of dust within an older SNR that is expanding into a relatively dense surrounding medium ($n_e$ ~ 100 $\mathrm{cm}^{-3}$) and has survived the passage of the reverse shock. The results suggest that supernovae may indeed be the dominant dust production mechanism in the dense environment of early Universe galaxies.
Type Ia supernovae, with their remarkably homogeneous light curves and spectra, have been used as standardizable candles to measure the accelerating expansion of the Universe. Yet, their progenitors remain elusive. Common explanations invoke a degenerate star (white dwarf) which explodes upon reaching close to the Chandrasekhar limit, by either steadily accreting mass from a companion star or violently merging with another degenerate star. We show that circumstellar interaction in young Galactic supernova remnants can be used to distinguish between these single and double degenerate progenitor scenarios. Here we propose a new diagnostic, the Surface Brightness Index, which can be computed from theory and compared with Chandra and VLA observations. We use this method to demonstrate that a double degenerate progenitor can explain the decades-long flux rise and size increase of the youngest known Galactic SNR G1.9+0.3. We disfavor a single degenerate scenario. We attribute the observed properties to the interaction between a steep ejecta profile and a constant density environment. We suggest using the upgraded VLA to detect circumstellar interaction in the remnants of historical Type Ia supernovae in the Local Group of galaxies. This may settle the long-standing debate over their progenitors.
Hyper-Kamiokande is a proposed next-generation water Cherenkov detector. If a galactic supernova happens, it will deliver a high event rate ($\mathcal{O}(10^5)$ neutrino events in total) as well as event-by-event energy information. Recent supernova simulations exhibit the Standing Accretion Shock Instability (SASI) which causes oscillations in the number flux and mean energy of neutrinos. The amplitude of these oscillations is energy-dependent, so the energy information available in Hyper-Kamiokande could be used to improve the detection prospects of these SASI oscillations. To determine whether this can be achieved in the presence of detector effects like backgrounds and finite energy uncertainty, we have started work on a detailed simulation of Hyper-Kamiokande's response to a supernova neutrino burst.
We report on a method, PUSH, for triggering core-collapse supernova (CCSN) explosions of massive stars in spherical symmetry. This method provides a framework to study many important aspects of core collapse supernovae: the effects of the shock passage through the star, explosive supernova nucleosynthesis and the progenitor-remnant connection. Here we give an overview of the method, compare the results to multi-dimensional simulations and investigate the effects of the progenitor and the equation of state on black hole formation.
Type Ia supernovae are bright stellar explosions distinguished by standardizable light curves that allow for their use as distance indicators for cosmological studies. Despite their highly successful use in this capacity, the progenitors of these events are incompletely understood. We describe simulating type Ia supernovae in the paradigm of a thermonuclear runaway occurring in a massive white dwarf star. We describe the multi-scale physical processes that realistic models must incorporate and the numerical models for these that we employ. In particular, we describe a flame-capturing scheme that addresses the problem of turbulent thermonuclear combustion on unresolved scales. We present the results of our study of the systematics of type Ia supernovae including trends in brightness following from properties of the host galaxy that agree with observations. We also present performance results from simulations on leadership-class architectures.
We estimate the diffuse supernova neutrino background (DSNB) using the recent progenitor-dependent, long-term supernova simulations from the Basel group and including neutrino oscillations at several post-bounce times. Assuming multi-angle matter suppression of collective effects during the accretion phase, we find that oscillation effects are dominated by the matter-driven MSW resonances, while neutrino-neutrino collective effects contribute at the 5-10% level. The impact of the neutrino mass hierarchy, of the time-dependent neutrino spectra and of the diverse progenitor star population is 10% or less, small compared to the uncertainty of at least 25% of the normalization of the supernova rate. Therefore, assuming that the sign of the neutrino mass hierarchy will be determined within the next decade, the future detection of the DSNB will deliver approximate information on the MSW-oscillated neutrino spectra. With a reliable model for neutrino emission, its detection will be a powerful instrument to provide complementary information on the star formation rate and for learning about stellar physics.
Observations of non-thermal emission from several supernova remnants suggest that magnetic fields close to the blastwave are much stronger than would be naively expected from simple shock compression of the field permeating the interstellar medium (ISM).   We present a simple model which is capable of achieving sufficient magnetic field amplification to explain the observations. We propose that the cosmic-ray pressure gradient acting on the inhomogeneous ISM upstream of the supernova blastwave induces strong turbulence upstream of the supernova blastwave. The turbulence is generated through the differential acceleration of the upstream ISM which occurs as a result of density inhomogeneities in the ISM. This turbulence then amplifies the pre-existing magnetic field.   Numerical simulations are presented which demonstrate that amplification factors of 20 or more are easily achievable by this mechanism when reasonable parameters for the ISM and supernova blastwave are assumed. The length scale over which this amplification occurs is that of the diffusion length of the highest energy non-thermal particles.
We review some results of the past 12 years derived from optical and infrared photometry of Type Ia supernovae. A combination of optical and infrared photometry allows us to determine accurately the extinction along the line of sight. The resulting distance measurements are much more accurate than can be obtained from optical data alone. Type Ia supernovae are very nearly standard candles in the near-infrared. Accurate supernova distances, coupled with other observational data available at present, allow us to determine the matter density in the universe and lead to evidence for the existence of Dark Energy. We can now address some questions on the grandest scale such as, "What is the ultimate Fate of the universe?"
We present a study of the properties of the host galaxies of unusual transient objects of two types, both being sub-luminous compared with the major classes of supernovae. Those of one type exhibit unusually strong calcium features, and have been termed 'Ca-rich'. Those of the second type, with SN2002cx as the prototype and SN2008ha as the most extreme example to date, have some properties in common with the first, but show typically lower ejecta velocities, and different early spectra. We confirm important differences in the environments of the two types, with the Ca-rich transients preferentially occurring in galaxies dominated by old stellar populations. Quantitatively, the association of the the Ca-rich transients with regions of ongoing star formation is well matched to that of type Ia supernovae. The SN2002cx-like transients are very different, with none of the present sample occurring in an early-type host, and a statistical association with star-formation regions similar to that of type II-P supernovae, and therefore a delay time of 30-50 Myrs.
LENA (Low Energy Neutrino Astronomy) has been proposed as a next generation 50 kt liquid scintillator detector. Its large target mass allows to search for the Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background (DSNB), which was generated by the cumulative emissions of all core-collapse supernovae throughout the universe. Indistinguishable background from reactor and atmospheric electron antineutrinos limits the detection window to the energy range between 9.5 MeV and 25 MeV. Depending on the mean supernova neutrino energy, about 5 to 10 events per year are expected in this energy window. The background from neutral current reactions of atmospheric neutrinos surpasses the DSNB by more than one order magnitude, but can be suppressed by pulse shape discrimination. Assuming that the residual background is known with 5% uncertainty, the DSNB can be detected with 2 sigma significance after 10 years of data taking. In case that no hint for a signal is seen, current standard DSNB models would be ruled out with more than 90% C.L.
The aim of this work is to present a semi-analytical light curve modeling code which can be used for estimating physical properties of core collapse supernovae (SNe) in a quick and efficient way. To verify our code we fit light curves of Type II SNe and compare our best parameter estimates to those from hydrodynamical calculations. For this analysis we use the quasi-bolometric light curves of five different Type IIP supernovae. In each case we get appropriate results for the initial pre-supernova parameters. We conclude that this semi-analytical light curve model is useful to get approximate physical properties of Type II SNe without using time-consuming numerical hydrodynamic simulations.
Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) have been intensively investigated due to its great homogeneity and high luminosity, which make it possible to use them as standardizable candles for the determination of cosmological parameters. In 2011, the physics Nobel prize was awarded for the discovery of the accelerating expansion of the Universe through observations of distant supernovae. This is a pedagogical article, aimed at those starting their study of that subject, in which we dwell on some topics related to the analysis of SNe Ia and their use in luminosity distance estimators. Here we investigate their spectral properties and light curve standardization, paying careful attention to the fundamental quantities directly related to the SNe Ia observables. Finally, we describe our own step-by-step implementation of a classical light curve fitter, the stretch, applying it to real data from the Carnegie Supernova Project.
The locally observed cosmic ray spectrum has several puzzling features, such as the excess of positrons and antiprotons above $\sim 20$ GeV and the discrepancy in the slopes of the spectra of cosmic ray protons and heavier nuclei in the TeV-PeV energy range. We show that these features are consistently explained by a nearby source which was active $\sim 2$ Myr ago and has injected $(1-2)\times 10^{50}$ erg in cosmic rays. The transient nature of the source and its overall energy budget point to the supernova origin of this local cosmic ray source. The age of the supernova suggests that the local cosmic ray injection was produced by the same supernova that has deposited $^{60}$Fe isotopes in the deep ocean crust.
Starburst regions with multiple powerful winds of young massive stars and supernova remnants are favorable sites for high-energy cosmic ray acceleration. A supernova shock colliding with a fast wind from a compact cluster of young stars allows the acceleration of protons to energies well above the standard limits of diffusive shock acceleration in an isolated SN. The proton spectrum in such a wind-supernova PeV accelerator is hard with a large flux in the high-energy-end of the spectrum producing copious gamma-rays and neutrinos in inelastic nuclear collisions. We argue that SN shocks in the Westerlund 1 cluster in the Milky Way may accelerate protons to about 40 PeV. Once accelerated, these CRs will diffuse into surrounding dense clouds and produce neutrinos with fluxes sufficient to explain a fraction of the events detected by IceCube Observatory from the inner Galaxy.
The cosmological standard model at present is widely accepted as containing mainly things we do not understand. In particular the appearance of a Cosmological Constant, or dark energy, is puzzling. This was first inferred from the Hubble diagram of a low number of Type Ia supernovae, and later corroborated by complementary cosmological probes. Today, a much larger collection of supernovae is available, and here I perform a rigorous statistical analysis of this dataset. Taking into account how the supernovae are calibrated to be standard candles, we run into some subtleties in the analysis. To our surprise, this new dataset - about an order of bigger than the size of the original dataset - shows, under standard assumptions, only mild evidence of an accelerated universe.
We use observational data on the magnitude-redshift relation for Type Ia supernovae together with constraints on the ages of the oldest stars to rule out a higher-dimensional extension of General Relativity with a negative kinetic-energy scalar field. This theory is of considerable physical interest because it produces accelerated expansion at both early and late times with a single new field, as in quintessential inflation scenarios. It is also of mathematical interest because it is characterized by an analytic expression for the macroscopic scale factor $a(t)$. We show that cosmological solutions of this theory can be usefully parametrized by a single quantity, the lookback time $\tau_{\text{tr}}$ corresponding to the transition from deceleration to acceleration. Supernovae data from the recently released Supernova Cosmology Project Union 2.1 compilation single out a narrow range of values for $\tau_{\text{tr}}$. In the context of the theory, however, these same values of $\tau_{\text{tr}}$ imply that the universe is much older than the oldest observed stars.
Detection of supernova relic neutrinos could provide key support for our current understanding of stellar and cosmological evolution, and precise measurements of these neutrinos could yield novel insights into the universe. In this paper, we studied the detection potential of supernova relic neutrinos using linear alkyl benzene (LAB) as a slow liquid scintillator. The linear alkyl benzene features good separation of Cherenkov and scintillation lights, thereby providing a new route for particle identification. We further addressed key issues in current experiments, including (1) the charged current background of atmospheric neutrinos in water Cherenkov detectors and (2) the neutral current background of atmospheric neutrinos in typical liquid scintillator detectors. A kiloton-scale LAB detector at Jinping with $\mathcal{O}$(10) years of data could discover supernova relic neutrinos with a sensitivity comparable to that of large-volume water Cherenkov detectors, typical liquid scintillator detectors, and liquid argon detectors.
We generalize our virial approach to study the neutral current neutrino response of nuclear matter at low densities. In the long-wavelength limit, the virial expansion makes model-independent predictions for neutrino-nucleon scattering rates and the density S_V and spin S_A responses. We find S_A is significantly reduced from one even at low densities. We provide a simple fit S_A^f(n,T,Y_p) of the axial response as a function of density n, temperature T and proton fraction Y_p. This fit reproduces our model independent virial results at low densities and reproduces the Burrows and Sawyer random phase approximation (RPA) results at high densities. Our fit can be incorporated into supernova simulations in a straight forward manner. Preliminary one dimensional supernova simulations suggest that the reduction in the axial response may enhance neutrino heating rates in the gain region during the accretion phase of a core-collapse supernovae.
Cosmic rays are charged relativistic particles that reach the Earth with extremely high energies, providing striking evidence of the existence of effective accelerators in the Universe. Below an energy around $\sim 10^{17}$ eV cosmic rays are believed to be produced in the Milky Way while above that energy their origin is probably extragalactic. In the early '30s supernovae were already identified as possible sources for the Galactic component of cosmic rays. After the '70s this idea has gained more and more credibility thanks to the the development of the diffusive shock acceleration theory, which provides a robust theoretical framework for particle energization in astrophysical environments. Afterwards, mostly in recent years, much observational evidence has been gathered in support of this framework, converting a speculative idea in a real paradigm. In this Chapter the basic pillars of this paradigm will be illustrated. This includes the acceleration mechanism, the non linear effects produced by accelerated particles onto the shock dynamics needed to reach the highest energies, the escape process from the sources and the transportation of cosmic rays through the Galaxy. The theoretical picture will be corroborated by discussing several observations which support the idea that supernova remnants are effective cosmic ray factories.
Massive stars, by which we mean those stars exploding as core collapse supernovae, play a pivotal role in the evolution of the Universe. Therefore, the understanding of their evolution and explosion is fundamental in many branches of physics and astrophysics, among which, galaxy evolution, nucleosynthesis, supernovae, neutron stars and pulsars, black holes, neutrinos and gravitational waves. In this chapter, the author presents an overview of the presupernova evolution of stars in the range between 13 and 120 $\rm M_\odot$, with initial metallicities between [Fe/H]=-3 and [Fe/H]=0 and initial rotation velocities $\rm v=0,~150,~300~km/s$. Emphasis is placed upon those evolutionary properties that determine the final fate of the star with special attention to the interplay among mass loss, mixing and rotation. A general picture of the evolution and outcome of a generation of massive stars, as a function of the initial mass, metallicity and rotation velocity, is finally outlined.
Despite the importance of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) for modern astrophysics, their detailed mechanism is still not fully understood. In this contribution, we present recent findings from numerical explosion models in the context of the observed diversity of SNe Ia and we discuss how these models can help to shed light on the explosion mechanism and the progenitor stars of SNe Ia. In addition, we introduce the Heidelberg Supernova Model Archive (HESMA), a new online data base where we provide integrated isotopic abundances and radially averaged ejecta profiles and synthetic observables for a wide range of state-of-the-art explosion models.
We have made core-collapse supernova simulations that allow oscillations between electron neutrinos (or their anti particles) with right-handed sterile neutrinos. We have considered a range of mixing angles and sterile neutrino masses including those consistent with sterile neutrinos as a dark matter candidate. We examine whether such oscillations can impact the core bounce and shock reheating in supernovae. We identify the optimum ranges of mixing angles and masses that can dramatically enhance the supernova explosion by efficiently transporting electron anti-neutrinos from the core to behind the shock where they provide additional heating leading to much larger explosion kinetic energies. We show that this effect can cause stars to explode that otherwise would have collapsed. We find that an interesting periodicity in the neutrino luminosity develops due to a cycle of depletion of the neutrino density by conversion to sterile neutrinos that shuts off the conversion, followed by a replenished neutrino density as neutrinos transport through the core.
Using the latest generation of adaptive optics imaging systems together with laser guide stars on 8m-class telescopes, we are finally revealing the previously-hidden population of supernovae in starburst galaxies. Finding these supernovae and measuring the amount of absorption due to dust is crucial to being able to accurately trace the star formation history of our Universe. Our images of the host galaxies are amongst the sharpest ever obtained from the ground, and reveal much about how and why these galaxies are forming massive stars (that become supernovae) at such a prodigious rate.
Core-collapse supernovae are accompanied by formation of neutron stars. The gravitation energy is transformed into the energy of the explosion, observed as SN II, SN Ib,c type supernovae. We present results of 2-D MHD simulations, where the source of energy is rotation, and magnetic field serves as a "transition belt" for the transformation of the rotation energy into the energy of the explosion. The toroidal part of the magnetic energy initially grows linearly with time due to differential rotation. When the twisted toroidal component strongly exceeds the poloidal field, magneto-rotational instability develops, leading to a drastic acceleration in the growth of magnetic energy. Finally, a fast MHD shock is formed, producing a supernova explosion. Mildly collimated jet is produced for dipole-like type of the initial field. At very high initial magnetic field no MRI development was found.
Stars close to the Eddington luminosity can have large low-density inflated envelopes. We show that the rise times of shock breakout signals from supernovae can be extended significantly if supernova progenitors have an inflated stellar envelope. If the shock breakout occurs in such inflated envelopes, the shock breakout signals diffuse in them, and their rise time can be significantly extended. Then, the rise times of the shock breakout signals are dominated by the diffusion time in the inflated envelope rather than the light-crossing time of the progenitors. We show that our inflated Wolf-Rayet star models whose radii are of the order of the solar radius can have shock breakout signals which are longer than ~100 sec. The existence of inflated envelopes in Wolf-Rayet supernova progenitors may be related to the mysterious long shock breakout signal observed in Type Ib SN 2008D. Extended shock breakout signals may provide evidence for the existence of inflated stellar envelopes and can be used to constrain the physical properties of these enigmatic structures.
The dense shell method for the determination of distances to type IIn supernovae has been briefly reviewed. Applying our method to SN 2006gy, SN 2009ip, and SN 2010jl supernovae, we have obtained distances in excellent agreement with the previously known distances to the parent galaxies. The dense shell method is based on the radiation hydrodynamic model of a supernova. The method of the blackbody model, as well as the correctness of its application for simple estimates of distances from observation data, has been justified.
We explain the excess of the antiproton fraction recently reported by the AMS-02 experiment by considering collisions between cosmic-ray protons accelerated by a local supernova remnant (SNR) and the surrounding dense cloud. The same "$pp$-collisions" provide the right ratio of daughter particles to fit the observed positron excess simultaneously in the natural model parameters. The supernova happened in relatively lower metalicity than the major cosmic-ray sources. The cutoff energy of electrons marks the supernova age of $\sim 10^{5}$ years, while the antiproton excess may extend to higher energy. Both antiproton and positron fluxes are completely consistent with our predictions in Fujita, Kohri, Yamasaki and Ioka (2009).
The 11 Mpc H-alpha and Ultraviolet Galaxy (11HUGS) Survey traces the star formation activity of nearby galaxies. In addition within this volume the detection completeness of core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) is high therefore by comparing these observed stellar births and deaths we can make a sensitive test of our understanding of how stars live and die. In this paper, we use the results of the Binary Population and Spectral Synthesis (BPASS) code to simulate the 11HUGS galaxies H-alpha and far-ultraviolet (FUV) star formation rate indicators (SFRIs) and simultaneously match the core-collapse supernova (CCSN) rate. We find that stellar population including interacting binary stars makes little difference to the total CCSN rate but increases the H-alpha and FUV fluxes for a constant number of stars being formed. In addition they significantly increase the predicted rate of type Ibc supernovae (SNe) relative to type II SNe to the level observed in the 11HUGS galaxies. We also find that instead of assuming a constant star formation history (SFH) for the galaxies our best fitting models have a star formation rate (SFR) that peaked more than 3 Myrs ago.
Long gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) associated with supernovae and short GRBs with Extended Emission (SGRBEE) from mergers are probably powered by black holes as a common inner engine, as their prompt GRB emission satisfies the same Amati correlation in the $E_{p,i}-E_{iso}$ plane. We introduce modified Bardeen equations to identify hyper-accretion driving newly formed black holes in core-collapse supernovae to near-extremal spin as a precursor to prompt GRB emission. Subsequent spin-down is observed in the BATSE catalog of long GRBs. Spin-down provides a natural unification of long durations associated with the lifetime of black hole spin for normal long GRBs and SGRBEEs, given the absence of major fallback matter in mergers. The results point to major emissions unseen in high frequency gravitational waves. A novel matched filtering method is described for LIGO-Virgo and KAGRA broadband probes of nearby core-collapse supernovae at essentially maximal sensitivity.
Almost all superluminous supernovae (SLSNe) whose peak magnitudes are $\lesssim -21$ mag can be explained by the $^{56}$Ni-powered model, magnetar-powered (highly magnetized pulsar) model or ejecta-circumstellar medium (CSM) interaction model. Recently, iPTF13ehe challenges these energy-source models, because the spectral analysis shows that $\sim 2.5M_\odot$ of $^{56}$Ni have been synthesized but are inadequate to power the peak bolometric emission of iPTF13ehe, while the rebrightening of the late-time light-curve (LC) and the H$\alpha$ emission lines indicate that the ejecta-CSM interaction must play a key role in powering the late-time LC. Here we propose a triple-energy-source model, in which a magnetar together with some amount ($\lesssim 2.5M_\odot$) of $^{56}$Ni may power the early LC of iPTF13ehe while the late-time rebrightening can be quantitatively explained by an ejecta-CSM interaction. Furthermore, we suggest that iPTF13ehe is a genuine core-collapse supernova rather than a pulsational pair-instability supernova candidate. Further studies on similar SLSNe in the future would eventually shed light on their explosion and energy-source mechanisms.
Core-collapse supernovae are among the most powerful explosions in the Universe, releasing about $10^{53}~\mbox{erg}$ of energy on timescales of a few tens of seconds. These explosion events are also responsible for the production and dissemination of most of the heavy elements, making life as we know it possible. Yet exactly how they work is still unresolved. One reason for this is the sheer complexity and cost of a self-consistent, multi-physics, and multi-dimensional core-collapse supernova simulation, which is impractical, and often impossible, even on the largest supercomputers we have available today. To advance our understanding we instead must often use simplified models, teasing out the most important ingredients for successful explosions, while helping us to interpret results from higher fidelity multi-physics models. In this paper we investigate the role of instabilities in the core-collapse supernova environment. We present here simulation and visualization results produced by our code GenASiS.
Recent hydrodynamical simulations of supernova (SN) evolution have highlighted the importance of a thorough control over microscopic physics responsible for such internal processes as neutrino heating. In particular, it has been suggested that modifications to the neutrino-nucleon elastic cross section can potentially play a crucial role in producing successful supernova explosions. One possible source of such corrections can be found in a nonzero value for the nucleon's strange helicity content $\Delta s$. In the present analysis, however, we show that theoretical and experimental progress over the past decade has suggested a comparatively small magnitude for $\Delta s$, such that its sole effect is not sufficient to provide the physics leading to supernova explosions.
The explosion mechanism of core-collapse supernovae has not been fully understood yet but multi-dimensional fluid instabilities such as standing accretion shock instability (SASI) and convection are now believed to be crucial for shock revival. Another multi-dimensional effect that has been recently argued is the asymmetric structures in progenitors, which are induced by violent convections in silicon/oxygen layers that occur before the onset of collapse, as revealed by recent numerical simulations of the last stage of massive star evolutions. Furthermore, it has been also demonstrated numerically that accretions of such non-spherical envelopes could facilitate shock revival. These two multi-dimensional may hence hold a key to successful explosions. In this paper, we performed a linear stability analysis of the standing accretion shock in core-collapse supernovae, taking into account non-spherical, unsteady accretion flows onto the shock to clarify the possible links between the two effects. We found that such pre-shock perturbations can excite the fluid instabilities efficiently and hence help the shock revive in core-collapse supernovae.
Here we present three-dimensional high resolution simulations of Type Ia supernova in the presence of a non-degenerate companion. We find that the presence of a nearby companion leaves a long-lived hole in the supernova ejecta. In particular, we aim to study the long term evolution of this hole as the supernova ejecta interacts with the surrounding interstellar medium. Using estimates for the x-ray emission, we find that the hole generated by the companion remains for many centuries after the interaction between the ejecta and the interstellar medium. We also show that the hole is discernible over a wide range of viewing angles and companion masses.
We present multi-dimensional core-collapse supernova simulations using the Isotropic Diffusion Source Approximation (IDSA) for the neutrino transport and a modified potential for general relativity in two different supernova codes: FLASH and ELEPHANT. Due to the complexity of the core-collapse supernova explosion mechanism, simulations require not only high-performance computers and the exploitation of GPUs, but also sophisticated approximations to capture the essential microphysics. We demonstrate that the IDSA is an elegant and efficient neutrino radiation transfer scheme, which is portable to multiple hydrodynamics codes and fast enough to investigate long-term evolutions in two and three dimensions. Simulations with a 40 solar mass progenitor are presented in both FLASH (1D and 2D) and ELEPHANT (3D) as an extreme test condition. It is found that the black hole formation time is delayed in multiple dimensions and we argue that the strong standing accretion shock instability before black hole formation will lead to strong gravitational waves.
Supernova remnants (SNRs) are diffuse extended sources characterized by a complex morphology and a non-uniform distribution of ejecta. Such a morphology reflects pristine structures and features of the progenitor supernova (SN) and the early interaction of the SN blast wave with the inhomogeneous circumstellar medium (CSM). Deciphering the observations of SNRs might open the possibility to investigate the physical properties of both the interacting ejecta and the shocked CSM. This requires accurate numerical models which describe the evolution from the SN explosion to the remnant development and which connect the emission properties of the remnants to the progenitor SNe. Here we show how multi-dimensional SN-SNR hydrodynamic models have been very effective in deciphering observations of SNR Cassiopeia A and SN 1987A, thus unveiling the structure of ejecta in the immediate aftermath of the SN explosion and constraining the 3D pre-supernova structure and geometry of the environment surrounding the progenitor SN.
Subluminous Type Ia supernovae, such as the Type Iax class prototype SN 2002cx, are described by a variety of models such as the failed detonation and partial deflagration of an accreting carbon-oxygen white dwarf star, or the explosion of an accreting, hybrid carbon-oxygen-neon core. These models predict that bound remnants survive such events with, according to some simulations, a high kick velocity. We report the discovery of a high proper motion, low-mass white dwarf (LP 40-365) that travels at a velocity greater than the Galactic escape velocity and whose peculiar atmosphere is dominated by intermediate-mass elements. Strong evidence indicates that this partially burnt remnant was ejected following a subluminous Type Ia supernova event. This supports the viability of single-degenerate supernova progenitors.
We suggest the future detection of neutrinos from a Galactic core-collapse supernova can be used to infer the progenitor's inner mass density structure. We present the results from 20 axisymmetric core-collapse supernova simulations performed with progenitors spanning initial masses in the range 11--30Msun, and focus on their connections to the progenitor compactness. The compactness is a measure of the mass density profile of the progenitor core and recent investigations have suggested its salient connections to the outcomes of core collapse. Our simulations confirm a correlation between the neutrinos emitted during the accretion phase and the progenitor's compactness, and that the ratio of observed neutrino events during the first hundreds of milliseconds provides a promising handle on the progenitor's inner structure. Neutrino flavor mixing during the accretion phase remains a large source of uncertainty.
We review the observations of dust emission in supernova rem- nants (SNRs) and supernovae (SNe). Theoretical calculations suggest that SNe, particularly core-collapse, should make significant quantities of dust, perhaps as much as a solar mass. Observations of extragalactic SNe have yet to find anywhere near this amount, but this may be the result of observa- tional limitations. SN 1987A, in the process of transitioning from a SN to an SNR, does show signs of a significant amount of dust forming in its ejecta, but whether this dust will survive the passage of the reverse shock to be injected into the ISM is unknown. IR observations of SNRs have not turned up significant quantities of dust, and the dust that is observed is generally swept-up by the forward shock, rather than created in the ejecta. Because the shock waves also destroy dust in the ISM, we explore the question of whether SNe might be net destroyers, rather than net creators of dust in the universe.
An effect of a magnetic field of an arbitrary strength on the beta-decay and reactions related with it by the crossing symmetry (the beta-processes) in supernovae and accretion disks around black holes is analyzed. Rates of the beta-processes and the energy and momentum transfered through them to an optically transparent matter are calculated. It is shown that the macroscopic momentum transferred to the medium increases linearly with the magnetic field strength and can substantially affect the dynamics of supernovae and accretion disks especially when a matter inside is degenerate. It is also demonstrated that the rates of the beta-processes and the energy deposition in these reactions for the magnetic field strength $B \lesssim 10^{15}$ G, which is assumed to be typical in supernovae and accretion disks, are lower than in the absence of the field. This suppression is more pronounced for reactions with neutrinos.
We investigate the flux ratio anomalies between macro-model predictions and the observed brightness of the supernova iPTF16geu, as published in a recent paper by More et al., 2017. This group suggested that these discrepancies are, qualitatively, likely due to microlensing. We analyze the plausibility of attributing this discrepancy to microlensing, and find that the discrepancy is too large to be due to microlensing alone. This is true whether one assumes knowledge of the luminosity of the supernova or allows the luminosity to be a free parameter. Varying the dark/stellar ratio likewise doesn't help. In addition, other macro-models with quadruplicity from external shear or ellipticity do not significantly improve to model. Finally, microlensing also makes it difficult to accurately determine the standard candle brightness of the supernova, as the likelihood plot for the intrinsic magnitude of the source (for a perfect macro-model) has a full width half maximum of 0.73 magnitudes. As such, the error for the standard candle brightness is quite large. This reduces the utility of the standard candle nature of type Ia supernovae.
Core-collapse supernova science is now entering an era where engine models are beginning to make both qualitative and quantitative predictions. Although the evidence in support of the convective engine for core-collapse supernova continues to grow, it is difficult to place quantitative constraints on this engine. Some studies have made specific predictions for the remnant distribution from the convective engine, but the results differ between different groups. Here we use a broad parameterization for the supernova engine to understand the differences between distinct studies. With this broader set of models, we place error bars on the remnant mass and basic yields from the uncertainties in the explosive engine. We find that, even with only 3 progenitors and a narrow range of explosion energies, we can produce a wide range of remnant masses and nucleosynthetic yields.
Supernova remnants (SNRs) arise from the interaction between the ejecta of a supernova (SN) explosion and the surrounding circumstellar and interstellar medium. Some SNRs, mostly nearby SNRs, can be studied in great detail. However, to understand SNRs as a whole, large samples of SNRs must be assembled and studied. Here, we describe the radio, optical, and X-ray techniques which have been used to identify and characterize almost 300 Galactic SNRs and more than 1200 extragalactic SNRs. We then discuss which types of SNRs are being found and which are not. We examine the degree to which the luminosity functions, surface-brightness distributions and multi-wavelength comparisons of the samples can be interpreted to determine the class properties of SNRs and describe efforts to establish the type of SN explosion associated with a SNR. We conclude that in order to better understand the class properties of SNRs, it is more important to study (and obtain additional data on) the SNRs in galaxies with extant samples at multiple wavelength bands than it is to obtain samples of SNRs in other galaxies
In a supernova explosion, the ejecta interacting with the surrounding circumstellar medium (CSM) give rise to variety of radiation. Since CSM is created from the mass lost from the progenitor star, it carries footprints of the late time evolution of the star. This is one of the unique ways to get a handle on the nature of the progenitor star system. Here, I will focus mainly on the supernovae (SNe) exploding in dense environments, a.k.a. Type IIn SNe. Radio and X-ray emission from this class of SNe have revealed important modifications in their radiation properties, due to the presence of high density CSM. Forward shock dominance of the X-ray emission, internal free-free absorption of the radio emission, episodic or non-steady mass loss rate, asymmetry in the explosion seem to be common properties of this class of SNe.
We evolve models of rotating massive stars up to the stage of iron core collapse using the MESA code and find a shell with a mixed composition of primarily helium and oxygen in some cases. In the parameter space of initial masses of 13-40 Mo and initial rotation velocities of 0-450 km/s that we investigate, we find a mixed helium-oxygen shell with a significant mass only for a small fraction of the models. While the shell is formed due to rotational mixing, the pre-collapse rotation rate is not very high, as required for an energetic collapse-induced thermonuclear explosion. Our results suggest that the collapse-induced thermonuclear explosion mechanism that was revisited recently can account for at most a small fraction of core-collapse supernovae. The presence of such a mixed helium-oxygen shell still might have some implications for core-collapse supernovae, such as some nucleosynthesis processes when jets are present, or might result in peculiar sub-luminous core-collapse supernovae.
Core-collapse supernovae produce elements between Fe and Ag depending on the properties of the ejected matter. Despite the fast progress in supernova simulations in the last decades, there are still uncertainties in the astrophysical conditions. In this paper we investigate the impact of astrophysical uncertainties on the nucleosynthesis. Since a systematic study based on trajectories from hydrodynamic simulations is computationally very expensive, we rely on a steady-state model. By varying the mass and radius of the proto-neutron star as well as electron fraction in the steady-state model, we cover a wide range of astrophysical conditions. In our study, we find four abundance patterns which can be formed in neutron-rich neutrino-driven ejecta. This provides a unique template of trajectories that can be used to investigate the impact of nuclear physics input on the nucleosynthesis for representative astrophysical conditions. Furthermore, we link these four patterns to the neutron-to-seed and alpha-to-seed ratios at $T=3$~GK. Therefore, our results give a good overview of the potential nucleosynthesis evolution which can occur in a supernova simulation.
Modern neutrino facilities will be able to detect a large number of neutrinos from the next Galactic supernova. We investigate the viability of the triangulation method to locate a core-collapse supernova by employing the neutrino arrival time differences at various detectors. We perform detailed numerical fits in order to determine the uncertainties of these time differences for the cases when the core collapses into a neutron star or a black hole. We provide a global picture by combining all the relevant current and future neutrino detectors. Our findings indicate that in the scenario of a neutron star formation, supernova can be located with precision of 1.5 and 3.5 degrees in declination and right ascension, respectively. For the black hole scenario, sub-degree precision can be reached.
We extend the formalism of a previous paper to include the effects of flybys and instantaneous perturbations such as supernovae on the long-term secular evolution of hierarchical multiple systems with an arbitrary number of bodies and hierarchy, provided that the system is composed of nested binary orbits. To model secular encounters, we expand the Hamiltonian in terms of the ratio of the separation of the perturber with respect to the barycentre of the multiple system, to the separation of the widest orbit. Subsequently, we integrate over the perturber orbit numerically or analytically. We verify our method for secular encounters, and illustrate it with an example. Furthermore, we describe a method to compute instantaneous orbital changes to multiple systems, such as asymmetric supernovae and impulsive encounters. The secular code, with implementation of the extensions described in this paper, is publicly available within AMUSE, and we provide a number of simple example scripts to illustrate its usage for secular and impulsive encounters, and asymmetric supernovae. The extensions presented in this paper are a next step toward efficiently modeling the evolution of complex multiple systems embedded in star clusters.
Although type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) are very useful in many astrophysical fields, their exact progenitor nature is still unclear. A basic method to distinguish the different progenitor models is to search the signal from the single degenerate (SD) model, e.g. the signal for the existence of a non-degenerate companion before or after supernova explosion. Observationally, some SNe Ia show such signal, while the others do not. Here, we propose a universal model to explain these observations based on the spin-up/spin-down model, in which a white dwarf (WD) will experience a spin-down phase before supernova explosion, and the spin-down timescale is determined by its initial mass, i.e. the more massive the initial WD, the shorter the spin-down timescale and then the more likely the SN Ia to show the SD signature. Therefore, our model predicts that the SNe Ia from hybrid carbon-oxygen-neon WDs are more likely to show the SD signature observationally, as some peculiar SNe Ia showed.
We explore the possibility of probing the nonstandard interactions between the neutrino and a hypothetical massive scalar or pseudoscalar via neutrino flavor transformation in supernovae. We find that in the ultrarelativistic limit, the effective interaction between the neutrinos vanishes if neutrinos are Dirac fermions but not if they are Majorana fermions. The impact of the new neutrino interaction upon the flavor transformation above the neutrinosphere is calculated in the context of the multi-angle "neutrino bulb model". We find that the addition of the nonstandard neutrino self-interaction (NSSI) to the ordinary V-A self-interaction between neutrinos is capable of dramatically altering the collective oscillations when its strength is comparable to the standard, V-A, interaction. The effect of flavor-preserving (FP) NSSI is generally to suppress flavor transformation, while the flavor-violating (FV) interactions are found to promote flavor transformations. If the neutrino signal from a Galactic supernova can be sufficiently well understood, supernova neutrinos can provide complimentary constraints on scalar/pseudoscalar interactions of neutrinos as well as distinguishing whether the neutrino is a Majorana or Dirac fermion.
The supernova remnant hypothesis for the origin of Galactic cosmic rays has passed several tests, but the firm identification of a supernova remnant pevatron, considered to be a decisive step to prove the hypothesis, is still missing. While a lot of hope has been placed in next-generation instruments operating in the multi-TeV range, it is possible that current gamma-ray instruments, operating in the TeV range, could pinpoint these objects or, most likely, identify a number of promising targets for instruments of next generation. Starting from the assumption that supernova remnants are indeed the sources of Galactic cosmic rays, and therefore must be pevatrons for some fraction of their lifetime, we investigate the ability of current instruments to detect such objects, or to identify the most promising candidates.
We carry out a comprehensive study of supernova ejecta-companion interaction in massive binary systems. We aim to physically understand the kinematics of the interaction and predict observational signatures. To do this we perform simulations over a vast parameter space of binary configurations, varying the masses of the progenitor and companion, structure of the companion, explosion energy, and orbital separation. Our results were not so consistent with classical models by Wheeler et al. 1975, sometimes deviating by an order of magnitude. We construct an alternative simple model which explains the simulated results reasonably well and can be used to estimate impact velocities for arbitrary explosion profiles and companion star structures. We then investigate the long term evolution after the supernova, where the companion can be inflated by the energy injected into the star. We find that the companion can become more than an order of magnitude overluminous straight after the supernova, but quickly fades away after $\sim10$ years and returns to its original luminosity in about a thermal timescale of the star. Finally, we also discuss the possible surface contamination of heavy elements from the slower ejecta.
In a previously presented proof-of-principle study we established a parametrized spherically symmetric explosion method (PUSH) that can reproduce many features of core-collapse supernovae. The present paper goes beyond a specific application that is able to reproduce observational properties of SN1987A and performs a systematic study of the explosion properties for an extensive set of non-rotating, solar metallicity stellar progenitor models in the mass range from 10.8 to 120 M$_\odot$.This includes the transition from neutron stars to black holes as the final result of the collapse of massive stars, and the relation of the latter to supernovae and faint/failed supernovae. The present paper provides the basis for extended nucleosynthesis predictions in a forthcoming paper to be employed in galactic evolution models.
The existence of the coherent neutrino-nucleus scattering reaction requires to evaluate, for any detector devoted to WIMP searches, the irreducible background due to conventional neutrino sources and at same time, it gives a unique chance to reveal supernova neutrinos. We report here a detailed study concerning a new directional detector, based on the nuclear emulsion technology. A Likelihood Ratio test shows that, in the first years of operations and with a detector mass of several tens of tons, the observation of the supernova signal can be achieved. The determination of the distance of the supernova from the neutrinos and the observation of $^8$B neutrinos are also discussed.
Supernova remnant (SNR) G309.2-0.6 has a peculiar radio morphology with two bright ears to the southwest and northeast, although the main shell outside the ears is roughly circular. Based on an earlier proposal that the supernova ejecta has a jet component with extra energy, the dynamical evolution of the remnant is solved using 3D hydrodynamical (HD) simulation to investigate the formation of the periphery of the remnant. Assuming the ejecta with a kinetic energy of $10^{51}$\,erg and a mass of $3~\mathrm{M}_{\odot}$ evolved in a uniform ambient medium for a time of $\sim 4000$\,yr and the jet component has cylindrical symmetry with a half open angle of $10^\circ$, the result indicates that the energy contained in the jet is about $10-15\%$ of the kinetic energy of the entire ejecta to reproduce the detected profile. This study supports that the remnant originated from a jet-driven core-collapse supernova.
Supernova 1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud has proven a unique laboratory to investigate particle acceleration in young supernova remnants. Here we report the first detection of linear polarization of the supernova's synchrotron emission from imaging observations at frequencies spanning from 20 to 50 GHz, carried out with the Australia Telescope Compact Array between October 2015 and May 2016. The direction of the radio polarization, corrected for Faraday rotation, points to a primarily radial magnetic field across the inner ring, encompassing both the reverse and forward shocks. The magnetic field strength peaks over the high-emissivity eastern sites, where efficient cosmic ray acceleration likely takes place under quasi-parallel shocks at high Mach numbers. The mean fraction of polarized emission in the brightest sites is $2.7\pm0.2\%$ at 22 GHz and $3.5\pm0.7\%$ at 44 GHz. In the inner remnant, non-radial components of the polarized emission appear to be more prevalent. However, the low significance detection in the central regions limits interpretation.
The work reported in this dissertation will concern the study of kinetics, cycles and quantum mechanic processes of nuclear reactions involved in massive stars together with explosive nucleosynthesis phenomena having a key role in supernovae explosion. Four main fields will be explored: physics of nuclear reaction, hydrogen burning, CNO cycles and explosive supernovae phenomena. The first chapter will provide an overview of the background of the nuclear physics and of the potential approaches to the field as quantum mechanic aspects, cross section and Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. The next chapter will describe the hydrogen burning processes for stars with low mass (our sun), the CNO and hot CNO cycles involved for higher mass stars and other cycles as sodium and magnesium. The third chapter will review the helium burning process involved in Red Giants as result of the exhausted hydrogen fuel. A short overview of other helium processes will be briefly discussed. The fourth chapter will provide a summary of the accepted model of explosive burning process involved in supernovae explosion. Explosive nucleosynthesis together with heavy elements as silicon burning processes will be also described.
We study how the predicted [$\alpha$/Fe]-[Fe/H] relations in early-type galaxies vary as functions of their stellar masses, ages and stellar velocity dispersions, by making use of cosmological chemodynamical simulations with feedback from active galactic nuclei. Our model includes a detailed treatment for the chemical enrichment from dying stars, core-collapse supernovae (both Type II and hypernovae) and Type Ia supernovae. At redshift $z=0$, we create a catalogue of $526$ galaxies, among which we determine $80$ early-type galaxies. From the analysis of our simulations, we find [$\alpha$/Fe]-[Fe/H] relations similar to the Galactic bulge. We also find that, in the oldest galaxies, Type Ia supernovae start to contribute at higher [Fe/H] than in the youngest ones. On the average, early-type galaxies with larger stellar masses (and, equivalently, higher stellar velocity dispersions) have higher [$\alpha$/Fe] ratios, at fixed [Fe/H]. This is qualitatively consistent with the recent observations of Sybilska et al., but quantitatively there are mismatches, which might require stronger feedback, sub-classes of Type Ia Supernovae, or a variable initial mass function to address.
We present radio observations and modelling of one of the nearest and brightest Type IIP supernova SN\,2004dj exploded in the galaxy NGC 2403 at a distance of $\sim$ 3.5 Mpc. Our observations span a wide frequency and temporal range of 0.24 - 43 GHz and $\sim 1$ day to 12 years since the discovery. We model the radio light curves and spectra with the synchrotron emission. We estimate the mass-loss rate of the progenitor star to be $\dot{M}$ $\sim$ 1 $\times$ 10$^{-6}$ M$_{\odot}\, \rm yr^{-1}$ for a wind speed of 10 km\,s$^{-1}$. We calculate the radio spectral indices using 1.06, 1.40, 5.00 and 8.46 GHz flux density measurements at multiple epochs. We witness steepening in the spectral index values for an extended period predominantly at higher frequencies. We explain this as a signature of electron cooling happening at the supernova shock in the plateau phase of the supernova. We estimate the cooling timescales for inverse Compton cooling and synchrotron cooling and find that inverse Compton cooling is the dominant cooling process.
Fast flavor conversions of supernova neutrinos, possible near the neutrinosphere, depends on an interesting interplay of collisions and neutrino oscillations. Contrary to naive expectations, the rate of self-induced neutrino oscillations, due to neutrino-neutrino forward scattering, comfortably exceeds the rate of collisions even deep inside the supernova core. Consistently accounting for collisions and oscillations, we present the first calculations to show that collisions can create the conditions for fast flavor conversions of neutrinos, but oscillations can continue without significant damping thereafter. This may have interesting consequences for supernova explosions and the nature of its associated neutrino emission.
The shell-type TeV source HESS J1912+101 was tentatively identified as an old supernova remnant, but is missing counterparts at radio and other frequencies. We analysed the Sino-German Urumqi $\lambda$6 cm survey and the Effelsberg $\lambda$11 cm and $\lambda$21 cm surveys to identify radio emission from HESS J1912+101 to clarify the question of a supernova origin. We find a partial shell of excessive polarisation at $\lambda$6 cm at the periphery of HESS J1912+101. At $\lambda$11 cm, its polarised emission is faint and suffers from depolarisation, while at $\lambda$21 cm, no related polarisation is seen. We could not separate the shell's total intensity signal from the confusing intense diffuse emission from the inner Galactic plane. However, a high-percentage polarisation of the shell's synchrotron emission is indicated. Our results support earlier suggestions that HESS J1912+101 is an old supernova remnant. The synchrotron emission is highly polarised, which is typical for evolved supernova remnants of low surface-brightness.
A mechanism of formation of gravitational waves in the Universe is considered for a nonspherical collapse of matter. Nonspherical collapse results are presented for a uniform spheroid of dust and a finite-entropy spheroid. Numerical simulation results on core-collapse supernova explosions are presented for the neutrino and magnetorotational models. These results are used to estimate the dimensionless amplitude of the gravitational wave with a frequency \nu ~1300 Hz, radiated during the collapse of the rotating core of a pre-supernova with a mass of 1:2M(sun) (calculated by the authors in 2D). This estimate agrees well with many other calculations (presented in this paper) that have been done in 2D and 3D settings and which rely on more exact and sophisticated calculations of the gravitational wave amplitude. The formation of the large-scale structure of the Universe in the Zel'dovich pancake model involves the emission of very long-wavelength gravitational waves. The average amplitude of these waves is calculated from the simulation, in the uniform spheroid approximation, of the nonspherical collapse of noncollisional dust matter, which imitates dark matter. It is noted that a gravitational wave radiated during a core-collapse supernova explosion in our Galaxy has a sufficient amplitude to be detected by existing gravitational wave telescopes.
We investigate the collective neutrino oscillations under the three flavor multi-angle approximation in a spherically symmetric simulation of failed supernovae. A failed supernova emits high neutrino fluxes in a short time, while intense accretion proceeds with high electron density enough to experience re-collapse into a black hole. Our results show that matter-induced effects completely dominate over neutrino self-interaction effects and multi-angle matter suppression occurs at all time snapshots we studied. These facts suggest us that only MSW resonances affect the neutrino flavor conversions in failed supernovae and simple spectra will be observed at neutrino detectors. We also estimate the neutrino event rate in current and future neutrino detectors from a source at 10 kpc as a Galactic event. The time evolution of neutrino detection could provide information about the dense and hot matter and constrain the neutrino mass ordering problem.
We use Gaia Data Release 2 to search for possible surviving binary companions to three of the best studied historical Milky Way core-collapse supernovae. Consistent with previous work, we find there to be no plausible binary companion to either the Crab or Cas A supernovae. For the first time, we present a systematic search for a former companion to the Vela supernova, and rule out essentially any surviving luminous ($>L_\odot$) companion. Based on parallax and proper motion, we identify a faint source (Star A; Gaia Source ID 5521955992667891584) which is kinematically consistent with being a former binary companion to the Vela SN progenitor. However, the inferred absolute magnitude of this source is extremely faint, raising the possibility that it may in fact be a background interloper. In addition, we derive a new distance ($3.37^{+4.04}_{-0.97}$ kpc) to the Crab SN based on the Gaia parallax measurements, which is significantly further than the 2 kpc distance typically adopted. Finally, we demonstrate that Gaia can be used to measure the secular decline in the luminosity of the Crab pulsar, and provide a new test of pulsar models.
NASA and other astrophysical data of the Cassiopeia A supernova remnant have been rendered into a three-dimensional virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) program, the first of its kind. This data-driven experience of a supernova remnant allows viewers to walk inside the leftovers from the explosion of a massive star, select the parts of the supernova remnant to engage with, and access descriptive texts on what the materials are. The basis of this program is a unique 3D model of the 340-year old remains of a stellar explosion, made by combining data from the NASA Chandra X-ray Observatory, Spitzer Space Telescope, and ground-based facilities. A collaboration between the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and Brown University allowed the 3D astronomical data collected on Cassiopeia A to be featured in the VR/AR program, which is an innovation in digital technologies with public, education, and research-based impacts.
Past high-energy density laboratory experiments provided insights into the physics of supernovae, supernova remnants, and the destruction of interstellar clouds. In a typical experimental setting, a laser-driven planar blast wave interacts with a compositionally-homogeneous spherical or cylindrical target. In this work we propose a new laboratory platform that accounts for curvature of the impacting shock and density stratification of the target. Both characteristics reflect the conditions expected to exist shortly after a supernova explosion in a close binary system. We provide details of a proposed experimental design (laser drive, target configuration, diagnostic system), optimized to capture the key properties of recent ejecta-companion interaction models. Good qualitative agreement found between our experimental models and their astrophysical counterparts highlights strong potential of the proposed design to probe details of the ejecta-companion interaction for broad classes of objects by means of high energy density laboratory experiments.
A dark photon is a well-motivated new particle which, as a component of an associated dark sector, could explain dark matter. One strong limit on dark photons arises from excessive cooling of supernovae. We point out that even at couplings where too few dark photons are produced in supernovae to violate the cooling bound, they can be observed directly through their decays. Supernovae produce dark photons which decay to positrons, giving a signal in the 511 keV annihilation line observed by SPI/INTEGRAL. Further, prompt gamma-ray emission by these decaying dark photons gives a signal for gamma-ray telescopes. Existing GRS observations of SN1987a already constrain this, and a future nearby SN could provide a detection. Finally, dark photon decays from extragalactic SN would produce a diffuse flux of gamma rays observable by detectors such as SMM and HEAO-1. Together these observations can probe dark photon couplings several orders of magnitude beyond current constraints for masses of roughly 1 - 100 MeV.
We have carried out VLA imaging and a Fermi timing analysis of the 115 ms gamma-ray and radio pulsar PSR J0002+6216. We found that the pulsar lies at the apex of a narrowly collimated cometary-like 7 arcmin tail of non-thermal radio emission which we identify as a bow-shock pulsar wind nebula. The tail of the nebula points back toward the geometric center of the supernova remnant CTB 1 (G116.9+0.2) 28 arcmin away, at a position angle $\theta_\mu=113^\circ$. We measure a proper motion with 2.9$\sigma$ significance from a Fermi timing analysis giving $\mu$=115$\pm$33 mas yr$^{-1}$ and $\theta_\mu=121^\circ\pm{13}^\circ$, corresponding to a large transverse pulsar velocity of 1100 km s$^{-1}$ at a distance of 2 kpc. This proper motion is of the right magnitude and direction to support the claim that PSR J0002+6216 was born from the same supernova that produced CTB 1. We explore the implications for pulsar birth periods, asymmetric supernova explosions, and mechanisms for pulsar natal kick velocities.
We optimize the third-generation gravitational-wave detector to maximize the range to detect core-collapse supernovae. Based on three-dimensional simulations for core-collapse and the corresponding gravitational-wave waveform emitted, the corresponding detection range for these waveforms is limited to within our galaxy even in the era of third-generation detectors. The corresponding event rate is two per century. We find from the waveforms that to detect core-collapse supernovae with an event rate of one per year, the gravitational-wave detectors need a strain sensitivity of 3$\times10^{-27}~$Hz$^{-1/2}$ in a frequency range from 100~Hz to 1500~Hz. We also explore detector configurations technologically beyond the scope of third-generation detectors. We find with these improvements, the event rate for gravitational-wave observations from CCSN is still low, but is improved to one in twenty years.
We report the discovery of optical emission from the non-radiative shocked ejecta of three young Type Ia supernova remnants (SNRs): SNR 0519-69.0, SNR 0509-67.5, and N103B. Deep integral field spectroscopic observations reveal broad and spatially resolved [Fe XIV] 5303{\AA} emission. The width of the broad line reveals, for the first time, the reverse shock speeds. For two of the remnants we can constrain the underlying supernova explosions with evolutionary models. SNR 0519-69.0 is well explained by a standard near-Chandrasekhar mass explosion, whereas for SNR 0509-67.5 our analysis suggests an energetic sub-Chandrasekhar mass explosion. With [S XII], [Fe IX], and [Fe XV] also detected, we can uniquely visualize different layers of the explosion. We refer to this new analysis technique as "supernova remnant tomography".
We review the computation of and associated uncertainties in the current understanding of the relic neutrino background due to core-collapse supernovae, black hole formation and neutron-star merger events. We consider the current status of uncertainties due to the nuclear equation of state (EoS), the progenitor masses, the source supernova neutrino spectrum, the cosmological star formation rate, the stellar initial mass function, neutrino oscillations, and neutrino self-interactions. We summarize the current viability of future neutrino detectors to distinguish the nuclear EoS and the temperature of supernova neutrinos via the detected relic supernova neutrino spectrum.
Observations of stellar remnants linked to Type Ia and Type Iax supernovae are necessary to fully understand their progenitors. Multiple progenitor scenarios predict a population of kicked donor remnants and partially-burnt primary remnants, both moving with relatively high velocity. But only a handful of examples consistent with these two predicted populations have been observed. Here we report the likely first known example of an unbound white dwarf that is consistent with being the fully-cooled primary remnant to a Type Iax supernova. The candidate, LP 93-21, is travelling with a galactocentric velocity of v$_{gal}$ $\simeq$ 605 km s$^{-1}$, and is gravitationally unbound to the Milky Way. We rule out an extragalactic origin. The Type Iax supernova ejection scenario is consistent with its peculiar unbound trajectory, given anomalous elemental abundances are detected in its photosphere via spectroscopic follow-up. This discovery reflects recent models that suggest stellar ejections likely occur often. Unfortunately the intrinsic faintness of white dwarfs, and the uncertainty associated with their direct progenitor systems, makes it difficult to detect and confirm such donors.
The last ten years have opened up a new parameter space in time-domain astronomy with the discovery of transients defying our understanding of how stars explode. These extremes of the transient paradigm represent the brightest - called superluminous supernova - and the fastest - known as fast, blue optical transients - of the transient zoo. The number of their discoveries and information gained per event have witnessed an exponential growth that has benefited observational and theoretical studies. The collected dataset and the understanding of such events have surpassed any initial expectation and opened up a future exploding with potential, spanning from novel tools of high-redshift cosmological investigation to new insights into the final stages of massive stars. Here, the observational properties of extreme supernovae are reviewed and put in the context of their physics, possible progenitor scenarios and explosion mechanisms.
The IceCube Neutrino Observatory, which instruments 1$\,$km$^3$ of clear ice at the geographic South Pole, was mainly designed to detect particles with energies in the multi-GeV to PeV range. Due to ice temperatures between $-20^\circ$C to $-43^\circ$C and the low radioactivity of the ice, the dark noise rates of the 5160 photomultiplier tubes forming the IceCube lattice are of order 500 Hz, which is particularly low for 10 inch photomultipliers. Therefore, IceCube can extend its searches to bursts of $\mathcal{O}$(10$\,$MeV) neutrinos lasting several seconds, which are expected to be produced by Galactic core collapse supernovae. By observing a uniform rise in all photomultiplier rates, IceCube can provide a particularly high statistical precision for the neutrino rate from supernovae in the inner part of our Galaxy ($<$ 20 kpc). In this paper, the tools and the method to study potential obscured or failed core collapse supernovae in our Galaxy are presented. The analysis will be based on 3911 days of IceCube data taken between April 17, 2008 and December 31, 2018.
We investigate how hypothetical particles - sterile neutrinos - can be produced in the interior of exploding supernovae via the resonant conversion of $\bar\nu_\mu$ and $\bar \nu_\tau$. The novelty of our treatment lies in the proper account of the resulting lepton number diffusion. We compute the yield of sterile neutrinos and find that even after taking into account back reaction, sterile neutrinos can carry out a sizeable fraction of the total energy of the explosion comparable to that of active neutrinos. The production is, however, exponentially sensitive to the temperature in the inner supernovae regions, making robust predictions of challenging. In order to understand whether this production affects supernova evolution and can therefore be constrained, detailed simulations including the effects of sterile neutrinos are needed.
The spectra fits to a sample of 34 supernova remnants (Zeng et al., 2019) are updated. $\gamma$-ray spectra of 20 supernova remnants (SNRs) with a soft TeV spectrum are further analyzed. We found that 17 of them can be fitted in the hadronic scenario with a single power-law ion distribution with an index of $\sim$ 2.6, which is significantly softer than the ion distribution inferred from $\gamma$-ray observations of star-burst galaxies. If Galactic cosmic rays are mostly produced by SNRs, this result suggests that SNRs in star-burst galaxies may never reach the phase with a soft $\gamma$-ray spectra or escape of high-energy particles from SNRs before they reach this phase with a soft $\gamma$-ray spectrum dominates the contribution of SNRs to Galactic cosmic rays.
We introduce a novel methodology for establishing the presence of Standing Accretion Shock Instabilities (SASI) in the dynamics of a core collapse supernova from the observed neutrino event rate at water- or ice-based neutrino detectors. The methodology uses a likelihood ratio in the frequency domain as a test-statistics; it is also employed to assess the potential to estimate the frequency and the amplitude of the SASI modulations of the neutrino signal. The parameter estimation errors are consistent with the minimum possible errors as evaluated from the inverse of the Fisher information matrix, and close to the theoretical minimum for the SASI amplitude. Using results from a core-collapse simulation of a 15 solar-mass star by Kuroda $\it {et\, al.}$ (2017) as a test bed for the method, we find that SASI can be identified with high confidence for a distance to the supernova of up to $\sim 6$ kpc for IceCube and and up to $\sim 3$ kpc for a 0.4 Mt mass water Cherenkov detector. This methodology will aid the investigation of a future galactic supernova.
The supernova explosion increases cosmic ray and x-ray fluxes in the surrounding interstellar medium. Cosmic ray particles and x-ray radiation penetrate nearby molecular clouds and affect the chemical and thermal evolution of the gas. Here we study chemical changes in the dense molecular gas influenced by a sudden increase of the ionization rate that may be caused by the supernova explosion. At the cloud core density $2 \times 10^4$ cm$^{-3}$, the H atom abundance reaches the equilibrium value at about $3 \times 10^4$ yr after the change in irradiation conditions. The response time of abundances of icy mantle species is $10^4-10^5$ yr. The abundances of neutral and grain mantle species may not reach their equilibrium values in molecular clouds in the vicinity of 'middle-aged' supernova remnants.
An influence of a magnetic field on beta-processes is investigated under conditions of a core-collapse supernova. For realistic magnetic fields reachable in astrophysical objects we obtain simple analytical expressions for reaction rates of beta-processes as well as the energy and momentum transferred from neutrinos and antineutrinos to the matter. Based on the results of one-dimensional simulations of a supernova explosion, we found that, in the magnetic field with the strength $B \sim 10^{15}$ G, the quantities considered are modified by several percents only and, as a consequence, the magnetic-field effects can be safely neglected, considering neutrino interaction and propagation in a supernova matter. The analytical results can be also applied for accretion discs formed at a merger of compact objects in close binary systems.
The absolute luminosities and homogeneity of early-time infrared (IR) light curves of type Ia supernovae are examined. Eight supernovae are considered. These are selected to have accurately known epochs of maximum blue light as well as having reliable distance estimates and/or good light curve coverage. Two approaches to extinction correction are considered. Owing to the low extinction in the IR, the differences in the corrections via the two methods are small. Absolute magnitude light curves in the J, H and K-bands are derived. Six of the events, including five established ``Branch-normal'' supernovae show similar coeval magnitudes. Two of these, SNe 1989B and 1998bu, were observed near maximum infrared light. This occurs about 5 days {\it before} maximum blue light. Absolute peak magnitudes of about -19.0, -18.7 and -18.8 in J, H & K respectively were obtained. The two spectroscopically peculiar supernovae in the sample, SNe 1986G and 1991T, also show atypical IR behaviour. The light curves of the six similar supernovae can be represented fairly consistently with a single light curve in each of the three bands. In all three IR bands the dispersion in absolute magnitude is about 0.15 mag, and this can be accounted for within the uncertainties of the individual light curves. No significant variation of absolute IR magnitude with B-band light curve decline rate, Delta m_{15}(B), is seen over the range 0.87<Delta m_{15}(B)<1.31. However, the data are insufficient to allow us to decide whether or not the decline rate relation is weaker in the IR than in the optical region. IR light curves of type Ia supernovae should eventually provide cosmological distance estimates which are of equal or even superior quality to those obtained in optical studies.
We calculate nucleosynthesis in core-collapse explosions of massive Pop III stars, and compare the results with abundances of metal-poor halo stars to constrain the parameters of Pop III supernovae. We focus on iron-peak elements and, in particular, we try to reproduce the large [Zn/Fe] observed in extremely metal-poor stars. The interesting trends of the observed ratios [Zn, Co, Mn, Cr, V/Fe] can be related to the variation of the relative mass of the complete and incomplete Si-burning regions in supernova ejecta. We find that [Zn/Fe] is larger for deeper mass-cuts, smaller neutron excess, and larger explosion energies. The large [Zn/Fe] and [O/Fe] observed in the very metal-poor halo stars suggest deep mixing of complete Si-burning material and a significant amount of fall-back in Type II supernovae. Furthermore, large explosion energies (E_51 >~ 2 for M ~ 13 Msun and E_51 >~ 20 for M >~ 20 Msun) are required to reproduce [Zn/Fe] ~ 0.5. The observed trends of the abundance ratios among the iron-peak elements are better explained with this high energy (``Hypernova'') models rather than the simple ``deep'' mass-cut effect, because the overabundance of Ni can be avoided in the hypernova models. We also present the yields of pair-instability supernova explosions of M = 130 - 300 Msun stars, and discuss that the abundance features of very metal-poor stars cannot be explained by pair-instability supernovae.
We present the discovery and follow-up observations of the afterglow of the GRB 011121 and its associated supernova SN 2001ke. Images were obtained with the OGLE 1.3m telescope in BVRI passbands, starting 10.3 hours after the burst. The temporal analysis of our early data indicates a steep decay, independent of wavelength with power-law index alpha=-1.72+/-0.05. There is no evidence for a break in the light curve earlier than 2.5 days after the burst. The spectral energy distribution determined from the early broad-band photometry is a power-law with index beta=-0.66+/-0.13 after correcting for a large reddening. Spectra, obtained with the Magellan 6.5m Baade telescope, reveal narrow emission lines from the host galaxy which provide a redshift of z=0.362+/-0.001 to the GRB. We also present late R and J-band observations of the afterglow between 7-17 days after the burst. The late-time photometry shows a large deviation from the initial decline and our data combined with Hubble Space Telescope photometry provide strong evidence for a supernova peaking about 12 rest-frame days after the GRB. The first spectrum ever obtained of a GRB supernova at cosmological distance revealed a blue continuum. SN 2001ke was more blue near maximum than SN 1998bw and faded more quickly which demonstrates that a range of properties are possible in supernovae which generate GRB. The blue color is consistent with a supernova interacting with circumstellar gas and this progenitor wind is also evident in the optical afterglow. This is the best evidence to date that classical, long gamma-ray bursts are generated by core-collapse supernovae.
We calculate nucleosynthesis in Population (Pop) III supernovae (SNe) and compare the yields with various abundance patterns of extremely metal-poor (EMP) stars. We assume that the observed EMP stars are the second generation stars, which have the metal-abundance patterns of Pop III SNe. Previous theoretical yields of Pop III SNe cannot explain the trends in the abundance ratios among iron-peak elements (Mn, Co, Ni, Zn)/Fe as well as the large C/Fe ratio observed in certain EMP stars with [Fe/H] <~ -2.5. In the present paper, we show that if we introduce higher explosion energies and mixing-fallback in the core-collapse SN models of M ~ 20 - 130 Msun, the above abundance features of both typical and C-rich EMP stars can be much better explained. We suggest that the abundance patterns of the [Fe/H] ~ -2.5 stars correspond to supernova yields with normal explosion energies, while those of the carbon un-enhanced ([C/Fe] < 1) stars with [Fe/H] =~ -4 ~ - 3 correspond to high-energy supernova yields. The abundance patterns of the C-rich ([C/Fe]>~ 2) and low [Fe/H] (=~ -5 \~ -3.5) stars can be explained with the yields of faint SNe that eject little 56Ni as observed in SN1997D. In the supernova-induced star formation model, we can qualitatively explain why the EMP stars formed by the faint or energetic supernovae have lower [Fe/H] than the EMP stars formed by normal supernovae. We also examine how the abundance ratios among iron-peak elements depend on the electron mole fraction Ye, and conclude that a large explosion energy is still needed to realize the large Co/Fe and Zn/Fe ratios observed in typical EMP stars with [Fe/H] <~ -3.5.
We present optical/near-infrared photometry and spectra of the type Ia SN 2002bo spanning epochs from -13 days before maximum B-band light to +102 days after. The pre-maximum optical coverage is particularly complete. In some respects, SN 2002bo behaves as a typical "Branch normal" type Ia supernova (SN Ia) at optical and IR wavelengths. We find a B-band risetime of 17.9+-0.5 days, a Dm_{15}(B) of 1.13+-0.05, and a M_B=-19.41+-0.42. However, comparison with other type Ia supernovae having similar Delta m_{15}(B) values indicates that in other respects SN 2002bo is unusual. While the optical spectra of SN 2002bo are very similar to those of SN 1984A, lower velocities and a generally more structured appearance are found in SNe 1990N, 1994D and 1998bu. For supernovae having Dm_(15)(B) > 1.2, we confirm the variation of R(SiII) (Nugent et al. 1995) with Dm_(15)(B). However, for supernovae such as SN2002bo, with lower values of Dm_(15)(B) the relation breaks down. Moreover, the evolution of R(SiII) for SN 2002bo is strikingly different from that shown by other type Ia supernovae. The velocities of SN 2002bo and 1984A derived from SII 5640A, SiII 6355A and CaII H&K lines are either much higher and/or evolve differently from those seen in other normal SNe Ia events. We suggest that the unusually low temperature, the presence of high-velocity intermediate-mass elements and the low abundance of carbon at early times indicates that burning to Si penetrated to much higher layers than in more normal type Ia supernovae. This may be indicative of a delayed-detonation explosion.
We present photometric typing analyses of three young supernovae observed with the Robotic 60-inch Telescope at Palomar Observatory (P60). This represents the first time that such photo-typing has been attempted, in a blind fashion, on newly-discovered supernovae. For one of the target supernovae, SN2004cs, our photometry provided the first constraint on the SN type, which we predicted would be type Ia. To the contrary, however, our subsequent Keck spectroscopy shows it to be an unusual type II supernova. For each of the other two supernovae, SN2004dh (type II) and SN2004dk (type Ib), our photo-typing results are consistent with the known type of the event as determined from ground-based spectroscopy; however, the colors of SN2004dk are also consistent with a type Ic or type II classification. We discuss our approach to the challenges of photo-typing - contamination by host galaxy light and the unknown photometric quality of the data - in the case where it is desirable to complete the analysis with just one night of observations. The growing interest in the properties and behavior of very young supernovae, and the increased discovery rate for such events, mean that prompt photo-typing analyses can provide useful input to observational campaigns. Our results demonstrate the value and feasibility of such a project for P60, at the same time illustrating its chief inherent shortcoming: an inability to identify new and unusual events as such without later spectroscopic observations.
In this review I discuss the various gamma-ray emission lines that are expected and have been observed from radioactive explosive nucleosynthesis products. The most important gamma-ray lines result from the decay chains of Ni-56, Ni-57, and Ti-44. Ni-56 is the prime explosive nucleosynthesis product of Type Ia supernovae, but Ni-56 is also a product of core-collapse supernovae. Gamma-ray line emission from its daughter product, Co-56, has been detected from SN1987A. The early occurrence of this emission indicates that some fraction of Ni-56, which is synthesized in the innermost supernova layers, must have mixed with the outermost ejecta.   Special attention is given to the gamma-ray line emission of the decay chain of Ti-44, giving line emission at 68 keV, 78 keV, and 1157keV. Given its decay time of 86 yr, one expects this line emission from young supernova remnants. The Ti-44 production is very sensitive to the explosion properties This makes Ti-44 an ideal tool to study the inner layers of the supernova explosion.   The gamma-ray line emission from Ti-44 has so far only been detected from the supernova remnant Cas A. I discuss these detections, which were made by COMPTEL and BeppoSAX, which suggest a Ti-44 yield of (1.5+/-1.0)x10^{-4} Msun. Moreover, I present some preliminary results of Cas A observations by INTEGRAL, which has yielded a 3sigma detection of the 68 keV line with the ISGRI instrument at a level consistent with the BeppoSAX results. A preliminary analysis of the vailable INTEGRAL-SPI data indicates that narrow line emission (Delta v < 1000 km/s) can be almost excluded at the 2sigma level. (Abridged)
We present broad-band light curves of nine supernovae ranging in redshift from 0.5 to 0.8. The supernovae were discovered as part of the ESSENCE project, and the light curves are a combination of Cerro Tololo 4-m and Hubble Space Telescope (HST) photometry. On the basis of spectra and/or light-curve fitting, eight of these objects are definitely Type Ia supernovae, while the classification of one is problematic. The ESSENCE project is a five-year endeavor to discover about 200 high-redshift Type Ia supernovae, with the goal of tightly constraining the time average of the equation-of-state parameter [w = p/(rho c^2)] of the "dark energy." To help minimize our systematic errors, all of our ground-based photometry is obtained with the same telescope and instrument. In 2003 the highest-redshift subset of ESSENCE supernovae was selected for detailed study with HST. Here we present the first photometric results of the survey. We find that all but one of the ESSENCE SNe have slowly declining light curves, and the sample is not representative of the low-redshift set of ESSENCE Type Ia supernovae. This is unlikely to be a sign of evolution in the population. We attribute the decline-rate distribution of HST events to a selection bias at the high-redshift edge of our sample and find that such a bias will infect other magnitude-limited SN Ia searches unless appropriate precautions are taken.
We present late-time (590-994 d) mid-IR photometry of the normal, but highly-reddened Type IIP supernova SN 2002hh. Bright, cool, slowly-fading emission is detected from the direction of the supernova. Most of this flux appears not to be driven by the supernova event but instead probably originates in a cool, obscured star-formation region or molecular cloud along the line-of-sight. We also show, however, that the declining component of the flux is consistent with an SN-powered IR echo from a dusty progenitor CSM. Mid-IR emission could also be coming from newly-condensed dust and/or an ejecta/CSM impact but their contributions are likely to be small. For the case of a CSM-IR echo, we infer a dust mass of as little as 0.036 M(solar) with a corresponding CSM mass of 3.6(0.01/r(dg))M(solar) where r(dg) is the dust-to-gas mass ratio. Such a CSM would have resulted from episodic mass loss whose rate declined significantly about 28,000 years ago. Alternatively, an IR echo from a surrounding, dense, dusty molecular cloud might also have been responsible for the fading component. Either way, this is the first time that an IR echo has been clearly identified in a Type IIP supernova. We find no evidence for or against the proposal that Type IIP supernovae produce large amounts of dust via grain condensation in the ejecta. However, within the CSM-IR echo scenario, the mass of dust derived implies that the progenitors of the most common of core-collapse supernovae may make an important contribution to the universal dust content.
We report Nearby Supernova Factory observations of SN 2005gj, the second confirmed case of a "hybrid" Type Ia/IIn supernova. Our early-phase photometry of SN 2005gj shows that the interaction is much stronger than for the prototype, SN 2002ic. Our first spectrum shows a hot continuum with broad and narrow H-alpha emission. Later spectra, spanning over 4 months from outburst, show clear Type Ia features combined with broad and narrow H-gamma, H-beta, H-alpha and HeI 5876,7065 in emission. At higher resolution, P Cygni profiles are apparent. Surprisingly, we also observe an inverted P Cygni profile for [OIII] 5007. We find that the lightcurve and measured velocity of the unshocked circumstellar material imply mass loss as recently as 8 years ago. The early lightcurve is well-described by a flat radial density profile for the circumstellar material. However, our decomposition of the spectra into Type Ia and shock emission components allows for little obscuration of the supernova, suggesting an aspherical or clumpy distribution for the circumstellar material. We suggest that the emission line velocity profiles arise from electron scattering rather than the kinematics of the shock. This is supported by the inferred high densities, and the lack of evidence for evolution in the line widths. Ground- and space-based photometry, and Keck spectroscopy, of the host galaxy are used to ascertain that the host galaxy has low metallicity Z/Zsun < 0.3; (95% confidence) and that this galaxy is undergoing a significant star formation event that began roughly 200+/-70 Myr ago. We discuss the implications of these observations for progenitor models and cosmology using Type Ia supernovae.
The presumed Wolf-Rayet star progenitors of Type Ib/c supernovae have fast, low density winds and the shock waves generated by the supernova interaction with the wind are not expected to be radiative at typical times of observation. The injected energy spectrum of radio emitting electrons typically has an observed index p=3, which is suggestive of acceleration in cosmic ray dominated shocks. The early, absorbed part of the radio light curves can be attributed to synchrotron self-absorption, which leads to constraints on the magnetic field in the emitting region and on the circumstellar density. The range of circumstellar densities inferred from the radio emission is somewhat broader than that for Galactic Wolf-Rayet stars, if similar efficiencies of synchrotron emission are assumed in the extragalactic supernovae. For the observed and expected ranges of circumstellar densities to roughly overlap, a high efficiency of magnetic field production in the shocked region is required (epsilon_B ~ 0.1). For the expected densities around a Wolf-Rayet star, a nonthermal mechanism is generally required to explain the observed X-ray luminosities of Type Ib/c supernovae. Although the inverse Compton mechanism can explain the observed X-ray emission from SN 2002ap if the wind parameters are taken from the radio model, the mechanism is not promising for other supernovae unless the postshock magnetic energy density is much smaller than the electron energy density. In some cases another mechanism is definitely needed and we suggest that it is X-ray synchrotron emission in a case where the shock wave is cosmic ray dominated so that the electron energy spectrum flattens at high energy. More comprehensive X-ray observations of a Type Ib/c supernova are needed to determine whether this suggestion is correct.
There is still no consensus about progenitor masses of Type IIP supernovae. We study a normal Type IIP SN 1999em in detail and compare it to a peculiar Type IIP SN 1987A. We computed the hydrodynamic and time-dependent atmosphere models interpreting simultaneously both the photometric and spectroscopic observations. The bolometric light curve of SN 1999em and the spectral evolution of its H-alpha line are consistent with a presupernova radius of 500 Rsun, an ejecta mass of 19.0 Msun, an explosion energy of 1.3x10^51 erg, and a radioactive 56Ni mass of 0.036 Msun. A mutual mixing of hydrogen-rich and helium-rich matter in the inner layers of the ejecta guarantees a good fit of the calculated light curve to that observed. Based on the hydrodynamic models in the vicinity of the optimal model, we derive the approximate relationships between the basic physical and observed parameters. We find that the hydrogen recombination in the atmosphere of a normal Type IIP SN 1999em, as well as most likely other Type IIP supernovae at the photospheric epoch, is essentially a time-dependent phenomenon. It is also shown that in normal Type IIP supernovae the homologous expansion of the ejecta in its atmosphere takes place starting from nearly the third day after the supernova explosion. A comparison of SN 1999em with SN 1987A reveals two very important results for supernova theory. First, the comparability of the helium core masses and the explosion energies implies a unique explosion mechanism for these core collapse supernovae. Second, the optimal model for SN 1999em is characterized by a weaker 56Ni mixing up to 660 km/s compared to a moderate 56Ni mixing up to 3000 km/s in SN 1987A, hydrogen being mixed deeply downward to 650 km/s.
We report the first detection at multiple radio wavelengths (13, 6 and 3.6 cm) of the compact sources within both nuclei of the Ultra Luminous Infra-Red Galaxy Arp 220. We present the radio spectra of the 18 detected sources. In just over half of the sources we find that these spectra and other properties are consistent with the standard model of powerful Type IIn supernovae interacting with their pre-explosion stellar wind. The rate of appearance of new radio sources identified with these supernova events suggests that an unusually large fraction of core collapse supernovae in Arp 220 are highly luminous; possibly implying a radically different stellar initial mass function or stellar evolution compared to galactic disks. Another possible explanation invokes very short (~3 x 10^5 year) intense (~10^3 M_Sol year^-1) star formation episodes with a duty cycle of ~10%. A second group of our detected sources, consisting of the brightest and longest monitored sources at 18 cm do not easily fit the radio supernova model. These sources show a range of spectral indexes from -0.2 to -1.9. We propose that these are young supernova remnants which have just begun interacting with a surrounding ISM with a density between 10^4 and 10^5 cm^-3. One of these sources is probably resolved at 3.6 cm wavelength with a diameter 0.9 pc. In the western nucleus we estimate that the ionized component of the ISM gives rise to foreground free-free absorption with opacity at 18 cm of <0.6 along the majority of lines of sight. Other sources may be affected by absorption with opacity in the range 1 to 2. These values are consistent with previous models as fitted to the radio recombination lines and the continuum spectrum.
We describe the implementation and optimization of the ESSENCE supernova survey, which we have undertaken to measure the equation of state parameter of the dark energy. We present a method for optimizing the survey exposure times and cadence to maximize our sensitivity to the dark energy equation of state parameter w=P/rho c^2 for a given fixed amount of telescope time. For our survey on the CTIO 4m telescope, measuring the luminosity distances and redshifts for supernovae at modest redshifts (z~0.5 +- 0.2) is optimal for determining w. We describe the data analysis pipeline based on using reliable and robust image subtraction to find supernovae automatically and in near real-time. Since making cosmological inferences with supernovae relies crucially on accurate measurement of their brightnesses, we describe our efforts to establish a thorough calibration of the CTIO 4m natural photometric system. In its first four years, ESSENCE has discovered and spectroscopically confirmed 102 type Ia SNe, at redshifts from 0.10 to 0.78, identified through an impartial, effective methodology for spectroscopic classification and redshift determination. We present the resulting light curves for the all type Ia supernovae found by ESSENCE and used in our measurement of w, presented in Wood-Vasey et al, 2007.
We develop a method to measure the strength of the absorption features in Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) spectra and use it to make a quantitative comparison between the spectra of Type Ia supernovae at low and high redshifts. In this case study, we apply the method to 12 high-redshift (0.212 < z < 0.912) SNe Ia observed by the Supernova Cosmology Project . Through measurements of the strengths of these features and of the blueshift of the absorption minimum in Ca II H&K, we show that the spectra of the high-redshift SNe Ia are quantitatively similar to spectra of nearby SNe Ia (z < 0.15). One supernova in our high redshift sample, SN 2002fd at z=0.279, is found to have spectral characteristics that are associated with peculiar SN 1991T/SN 1999aa-like supernovae.
Supernovae are rare nearby, but they are not rare in the Universe, and all past core-collapse supernovae contributed to the Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background (DSNB), for which the near-term detection prospects are very good. The Super-Kamiokande limit on the DSNB electron {\it antineutrino} flux, $\phi(E_\nu > 19.3 {\rm MeV}) < 1.2$ cm$^{-2}$ s$^{-1}$, is just above the range of recent theoretical predictions based on the measured star formation rate history. We show that the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory should be able to test the corresponding DSNB electron {\it neutrino} flux with a sensitivity as low as $\phi(22.5 < E_\nu < 32.5 {\rm MeV}) \simeq 6 $ cm$^{-2}$ s$^{-1}$, improving the existing Mont Blanc limit by about three orders of magnitude. While conventional supernova models predict comparable electron neutrino and antineutrino fluxes, it is often considered that the first (and forward-directed) SN 1987A event in the Kamiokande-II detector should be attributed to electron-neutrino scattering with an electron, which would require a substantially enhanced electron neutrino flux. We show that with the required enhancements in either the burst or thermal phase $\nu_e$ fluxes, the DSNB electron neutrino flux would generally be detectable in the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory. A direct experimental test could then resolve one of the enduring mysteries of SN 1987A: whether the first Kamiokande-II event reveals a serious misunderstanding of supernova physics, or was simply an unlikely statistical fluctuation. Thus the electron neutrino sensitivity of the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory is an important complement to the electron antineutrino sensitivity of Super-Kamiokande in the quest to understand the DSNB.
Physical sizes of extended radio galaxies can be employed as a cosmological "standard ruler", using a previously developed method. Eleven new radio galaxies are added to our previous sample of nineteen sources, forming a sample of thirty objects with redshifts between 0 and 1.8. This sample of radio galaxies are used to obtain the best fit cosmological parameters in a quintessence model in a spatially flat universe, a cosmological constant model that allows for non-zero space curvature, and a rolling scalar field model in a spatially flat universe. Results obtained with radio galaxies are compared with those obtained with different supernova samples, and with combined radio galaxy and supernova samples. Results obtained with different samples are consistent, suggesting that neither method is seriously affected by systematic errors. Best fit radio galaxy and supernovae model parameters determined in the different cosmological models are nearly identical, and are used to determine dimensionless coordinate distances to supernovae and radio galaxies, and distance moduli to the radio galaxies. The distance moduli to the radio galaxies can be combined with supernovae samples to increase the number of sources, particularly high-redshift sources, in the samples. The constraints obtained here with the combined radio galaxy plus supernovae data set in the rolling scalar field model are quite strong. The best fit parameter values suggest a value of omega is less than about 0.35, and the model parameter alpha is close to zero; that is, a cosmological constant provides a good description of the data. We also obtain new constraints on the physics of engines that power the large-scale radio emission.
Wide-field VLBI observations of the nearby starburst galaxy NGC 4945, obtained with the Australian LBA, have produced 2.3 GHz images over two epochs with a maximum spatial resolution of 0.3 pc. 15 sources were detected, 13 of which correspond to sources identified in higher frequency (3 cm and 12 mm) ATCA images. Four of the sources are resolved into shell-like structures ranging between 1.1 to 2.1 pc in diameter. From these data the spectra of 13 compact radio sources in NGC 4945 were modelled; nine were found to be consistent with free-free absorbed power laws and four with a simple power law spectrum. The free-free opacity is highest toward the nucleus but varies significantly throughout the nuclear region, implying that the overall structure of the ionised medium is clumpy. Of the 13 sources, 10 have steep intrinsic spectra associated with synchrotron emission from supernova remnants, the remaining sources have flat intrinsic spectra which may be associated with thermal radio emission. A non-thermal source with a jet-like morphology is detected ~1" from the assumed location of the AGN. A type II supernova (SN) rate upper limit of 15.3/yr is determined for the inner 250 pc region of the galaxy at the 95% confidence level, based on the lack of detection of new sources in observations spanning 1.9 years and a simple model for the evolution of supernova remnants. A type II SN rate of >0.1(v/1e4)/yr is implied from estimates of supernova remnant source counts, sizes and expansion rates, where v is the radial expansion velocity of the supernova remnant in km/s. A SFR of 2.4(v/1e4)<SFR(M>=5Msun)<370 Msun/yr has been estimated directly from the SN rate limits and is of the same order of magnitude as rates determined from integrated FIR and radio luminosities.
Inhomogeneous universe models have been proposed as an alternative explanation for the apparent acceleration of the cosmic expansion that does not require dark energy. In the simplest class of inhomogeneous models, we live within a large, spherically symmetric void. Several studies have shown that such a model can be made consistent with many observations, in particular the redshift--luminosity distance relation for type Ia supernovae, provided that the void is of Gpc size and that we live close to the center. Such a scenario challenges the Copernican principle that we do not occupy a special place in the universe. We use the first-year Sloan Digital Sky Survey-II supernova search data set as well as the Constitution supernova data set to put constraints on the observer position in void models, using the fact that off-center observers will observe an anisotropic universe. We first show that a spherically symmetric void can give good fits to the supernova data for an on-center observer, but that the two data sets prefer very different voids. We then continue to show that the observer can be displaced at least fifteen percent of the void scale radius from the center and still give an acceptable fit to the supernova data. When combined with the observed dipole anisotropy of the cosmic microwave background however, we find that the data compells the observer to be located within about one percent of the void scale radius. Based on these results, we conclude that considerable fine-tuning of our position within the void is needed to fit the supernova data, strongly disfavouring the model from a Copernican principle point of view.
We study the formation of molecular precursors to dust in the ejecta of Population III supernovae using a chemical kinetic approach. Our work focuses on zero-metallicity 20 Msun and 170 Msun progenitors, and we consider fully-macroscopically mixed and unmixed ejecta. The nucleation stage for small silica, metal oxides and sulphides, pure metal, and carbon clusters is described with a new chemical reaction network. We consider the effect of the pressure dependence of critical nucleation rates, and test the impact of microscopically-mixed He+ on carbon dust formation. The unmixed ejecta of a 170 Msun progenitor supernova synthesizes ~ 5.6 Msun of small clusters, while its 20 Msun counterpart produces ~ 0.103 Msun. Our results point to smaller amounts of dust formed in the ejecta of Pop. III supernovae by a factor ~ 5 compared to values derived by previous studies, and to different dust chemical composition. Such deviations result from some erroneous assumptions made, the inappropriate use of classical nucleation theory to model dust formation, and the omission of the synthethis of molecules in supernova ejecta. Unmixed ejecta of massive Pop. III supernovae chiefly form silica and/or silicates, and pure silicon grains whereas their lower mass counterparts form a dust mixture dominated by silica and/or silicates, pure silicon and iron sulphides. Amorphous carbon can only condense in ejecta where the carbon-rich zone is deprived of He+. The first dust enrichment to the primordial gas in the early universe from Pop. III massive supernova comprises primarily pure silicon, silica and silicates. If carbon dust is present at redshift z> 6, alternative dust sources must be considered.
The giant elliptical galaxy NGC 1316 (Fornax A) is a well-studied member of the Fornax Cluster and a prolific producer of Type Ia supernovae, having hosted four observed events since 1980. Here we present detailed optical and near-infrared light curves of the spectroscopically normal SN 2006dd. These data are used, along with previously published photometry of the normal SN 1980N and SN 1981D, and the fast-declining, low-luminosity SN 2006mr, to compute independent estimates of the host reddening for each supernova, and the distance to NGC 1316. From the three normal supernovae, we find a distance of 17.8 +/- 0.3 (random) +/- 0.3 (systematic) Mpc for Ho = 72. Distance moduli derived from the "EBV" and Tripp methods give values that are mutually consistent to 4 -- 8%. Moreover, the weighted means of the distance moduli for these three SNe for three methods agree to within 3%. This consistency is encouraging and supports the premise that Type Ia supernovae are reliable distance indicators at the 5% precision level or better. On the other hand, the two methods used to estimate the distance of the fast-declining SN 2006mr both yield a distance to NGC 1316 which is 25-30% larger. This disparity casts doubt on the suitability of fast-declining events for estimating extragalactic distances. Modest-to-negligible host galaxy reddening values are derived for all four supernovae. Nevertheless, two of them (SN 2006dd and SN 2006mr) show strong NaID interstellar lines in the host galaxy system. The strength of this absorption is completely inconsistent with the small reddening values derived from the supernova light curves if the gas in NGC 1316 is typical of that found in the interstellar medium of the Milky Way. In addition, the equivalent width of the NaID lines in SN 2006dd appear to have weakened significantly some 100-150 days after explosion.
We present photometric properties and distance measurements of 252 high redshift Type Ia supernovae (0.15 < z < 1.1) discovered during the first three years of the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS). These events were detected and their multi-colour light curves measured using the MegaPrime/MegaCam instrument at the Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope (CFHT), by repeatedly imaging four one-square degree fields in four bands. Follow-up spectroscopy was performed at the VLT, Gemini and Keck telescopes to confirm the nature of the supernovae and to measure their redshifts. Systematic uncertainties arising from light curve modeling are studied, making use of two techniques to derive the peak magnitude, shape and colour of the supernovae, and taking advantage of a precise calibration of the SNLS fields. A flat LambdaCDM cosmological fit to 231 SNLS high redshift Type Ia supernovae alone gives Omega_M = 0.211 +/- 0.034(stat) +/- 0.069(sys). The dominant systematic uncertainty comes from uncertainties in the photometric calibration. Systematic uncertainties from light curve fitters come next with a total contribution of +/- 0.026 on Omega_M. No clear evidence is found for a possible evolution of the slope (beta) of the colour-luminosity relation with redshift.
Injection of material from a core-collapse supernova into the solar system's already-formed disk is one proposed mechanism for producing the short-lived radionuclides, such as 26Al and 41Ca, inferred from isotopic studies of meteorites to have existed in the solar nebula. This hypothesis has recently been challenged on the basis that the injection of enough supernova material to match the meteoritic abundances of 26Al and 41Ca would produce large, measureable, and unobserved collateral effects on oxygen isotopes. Here we calculate again the shifts in oxygen isotopes due to injection of supernova material in the solar nebula, using a variety of nucleosynthetic conditions of our own progenitor explosions. Unlike previous studies of this type, we also consider the effect of non-homogeneity in abundance distribution of the nucleosynthesis products after the explosion. We calculate the shifts in oxygen isotopes due to injection of sufficient supernova material to produce the meteoritic abundances of 26Al and 41Ca, and analyze the predicted shifts in detail for compatibility with meteoritic data. We find that the range in possible isotopic shifts is considerable and sensitive to parameters such as progenitor mass and anisotropy of the explosion; however, a small number of compatible scenarios do exist. Because of the wide range of outcomes and the sensitivity of isotopic yields to assumed conditions, it is difficult to constrain the supernova that may have led to injection of 26Al in the solar nebula. Conversely, we argue that the existence of viable counterexamples demonstrates that it is premature to use oxygen isotopes to rule out injection of 26Al and 41Ca into the solar nebula protoplanetary disk by a nearby supernova.
We explore fallback accretion onto newly born magnetars during the supernova of massive stars. Strong magnetic fields (~10^{15} G) and short spin periods (~1-10 ms) have an important influence on how the magnetar interacts with the infalling material. At long spin periods, weak magnetic fields, and high accretion rates, sufficient material is accreted to form a black hole, as is commonly found for massive progenitor stars. When B<5*10^{14} G, accretion causes the magnetar to spin sufficiently rapidly to deform triaxially and produce gravitational waves, but only for ~50-200 s until it collapses to a black hole. Conversely, at short spin periods, strong magnetic fields, and low accretion rates, the magnetar is in the "propeller regime" and avoids becoming a black hole by expelling incoming material. This process spins down the magnetar, so that gravitational waves are only expected if the initial protoneutron star is spinning rapidly. Even when the magnetar survives, it accretes at least ~0.3 solar masses, so we expect magnetars born within these types of environments to be more massive than the 1.4 solar masses typically associated with neutron stars. The propeller mechanism converts the ~10^{52} ergs of spin energy in the magnetar into the kinetic energy of an outflow, which shock heats the outgoing supernova ejecta during the first ~10-30 s. For a small ~5 solar mass hydrogen-poor envelope, this energy creates a brighter, faster evolving supernova with high ejecta velocities ~(1-3)*10^4 km/s and may appear as a broad-lined Type Ib/c supernova. For a large >10 solar mass hydrogen-rich envelope, the result is a bright Type IIP supernova with a plateau luminosity of ~10^{43} ergs/s lasting for a timescale of ~60-80 days.
Radio properties of supernova outbursts remain poorly understood despite longstanding campaigns following events discovered at other wavelengths. After ~ 30 years of observations, only ~ 50 supernovae have been detected at radio wavelengths, none of which are Type Ia. Even the most radio-loud events are ~ 10^4 fainter in the radio than in the optical; to date, such intrinsically dim objects have only been visible in the very local universe. The detection and study of radio supernovae (RSNe) will be fundamentally altered and dramatically improved as the next generation of radio telescopes comes online, including EVLA, ASKAP, and MeerKAT, and culminating in the Square Kilometer Array (SKA); the latter should be > 50 times more sensitive than present facilities. SKA can repeatedly scan large (> 1 deg^2) areas of the sky, and thus will discover RSNe and other transient sources in a new, automatic, untargeted, and unbiased way. We estimate SKA will be able to detect core-collapse RSNe out to redshift z ~ 5, with an all-redshift rate ~ 620 events yr^-1 deg^-2, assuming a survey sensitivity of 50 nJy and radio lightcurves like those of SN 1993J. Hence SKA should provide a complete core-collapse RSN sample that is sufficient for statistical studies of radio properties of core-collapse supernovae. EVLA should find ~ 160 events yr^-1 deg^-2 out to redshift z ~ 3, and other SKA precursors should have similar detection rates. We also provided recommendations of the survey strategy to maximize the RSN detections of SKA. This new radio core-collapse supernovae sample will complement the detections from the optical searches, such as the LSST, and together provide crucial information on massive star evolution, supernova physics, and the circumstellar medium, out to high redshift. Additionally, SKA may yield the first radio Type Ia detection via follow-up of nearby events discovered at other wavelengths.
Although the connection of the Chinese "guest" star of 393 AD with the Galactic supernova remnant RX J1713.7-3946 (G347.3-0.5) made by Wang et al. in 1997 is consistent with the remnant's relatively young properties and the guest star's projected position within the `tail' of the constellation Scorpius, there are difficulties with such an association. The brief Chinese texts concerning the 393 AD guest star make no comment about its apparent brightness stating only that it disappeared after 8 months. However, at the remnant's current estimated 1 - 1.3 kpc distance and A_v ~ 3 mag, its supernova should have been a visually bright object at maximum light (-3.5 to -5.0 mag) and would have remained visible for over a year. The peak brightness ~ 0 magnitude adopted by Wang et al. and others would require the RX J1713.7-3946 supernova to have been a very subluminous supernova event similar to or fainter than CCSNe like SN 2005cs. We also note problems connecting SN 393 with a European record in which the Roman poet Claudian describes a visually brilliant star in the heavens around 393 AD that could be readily seen even in midday. Although several authors have suggested this account may be a reference to the Chinese supernova of 393, Scorpius would not be visible near midday in March when the Chinese first reported the 393 guest star. We review both the Chinese and Roman accounts and calculate probable visual brightnesses for a range of supernova subtypes and conclude that neither the Chinese nor the Roman descriptions are easily reconciled with an expected RX J1713.7-3946 supernova brightness and duration.
The discovery of a population of superluminous supernovae (SLSNe), with peak luminosities a factor of ~100 brighter than normal SNe (typically SLSNe have M_V <-21), has shown an unexpected diversity in core-collapse supernova properties. Numerous models have been postulated for the nature of these events, including a strong interaction of the shockwave with a dense circumstellar environment, a re-energizing of the outflow via a central engine, or an origin in the catastrophic destruction of the star following a loss of pressure due to pair production in an extremely massive stellar core (so-called pair instability supernovae). Here we consider constraints that can be placed on the explosion mechanism of Hydrogen-poor SLSNe (SLSNe-I) via X-ray observations, with XMM-Newton, Chandra and Swift, and show that at least one SLSNe-I is likely the brightest X-ray supernovae ever observed, with L_X ~ 10^45 ergs/s, ~150 days after its initial discovery. This is a luminosity 3 orders of magnitude higher than seen in other X-ray supernovae powered via circumstellar interactions. Such high X-ray luminosities are sufficient to ionize the ejecta and markedly reduce the optical depth, making it possible to see deep into the ejecta and any source of emission that resides there. Alternatively, an engine could have powered a moderately relativistic jet external to the ejecta, similar to those seen in gamma-ray bursts. If the detection of X-rays does require an engine it implies that these SNe do create compact objects, and that the stars are not completely destroyed in a pair instability event. Future observations will determine which, if any, of these mechanisms are at play in superluminous supernovae.
Because supernova remnants are short lived, studies of neutron star X-ray binaries within supernova remnants probe the earliest stages in the life of accreting neutron stars. However, such objects are exceedingly rare: none were known to exist in our Galaxy. We report the discovery of the natal supernova remnant of the accreting neutron star Circinus X-1, which places an upper limit of t < 4, 600 years on its age, making it the youngest known X-ray binary and a unique tool to study accretion, neutron star evolution, and core collapse supernovae. This discovery is based on a deep 2009 Chandra X-ray observation and new radio observations of Circinus X-1. Circinus X-1 produces type I X-ray bursts on the surface of the neutron star, indicating that the magnetic field of the neutron star is small. Thus, the young age implies either that neutron stars can be born with low magnetic fields or that they can rapidly become de-magnetized by accretion. Circinus X-1 is a microquasar, creating relativistic jets which were thought to power the arcminute scale radio nebula surrounding the source. Instead, this nebula can now be attributed to non-thermal synchrotron emission from the forward shock of the supernova remnant. The young age is consistent with the observed rapid orbital evolution and the highly eccentric orbit of the system and offers the chance to test the physics of post-supernova orbital evolution in X-ray binaries in detail for the first time.
The discovery of 150 - 300 M$_{\odot}$ stars in the Local Group and pair-instability supernova candidates at low redshifts has excited interest in this exotic explosion mechanism. Realistic light curves for pair-instability supernovae at near-solar metallicities are key to identifying and properly interpreting these events as more are found. We have modeled pair-instability supernovae of 150 - 500 M$_{\odot}$ Z $\sim$ 0.1 - 0.4 Z$_{\odot}$ stars. These stars lose up to 80% of their mass to strong line-driven winds and explode as bare He cores. We find that their light curves and spectra are quite different from those of Population III pair-instability explosions, which therefore cannot be used as templates for low-redshift events. Although non-zero metallicity pair-instability supernovae are generally dimmer than their Population III counterparts, in some cases they will be bright enough to be detected at the earliest epochs at which they can occur, the formation of the first galaxies at $z \sim$ 10 - 15. Others can masquerade as dim, short duration supernovae that are only visible in the local universe and that under the right conditions could be hidden in a wide variety of supernova classes. We also report for the first time that some pair-instability explosions can create black holes with masses of $\sim$ 100 M$_{\odot}$.
Photometric and spectral evolution of the Type Ic supernova SN 2007ru until around 210 days after maximum are presented. The spectra show broad spectral features due to very high expansion velocity, normally seen in hypernovae. The photospheric velocity is higher than other normal Type Ic supernovae. It is lower than SN 1998bw at $\sim$ 8 days after the explosion, but is comparable at later epochs. The light curve evolution of SN 2007ru indicates a fast rise time of 8$\pm$3 days to $B$ band maximum and post-maximum decline more rapid than other broad-line Type Ic supernovae. With an absolute $V$ magnitude of -19.06, SN 2007ru is comparable in brightness with SN 1998bw and lies at the brighter end of the observed Type Ic supernovae. The ejected mass of \Nifs is estimated to be $\sim0.4\Msun$. The fast rise and decline of the light curve and the high expansion velocity suggest that SN 2007ru is an explosion with a high kinetic energy/ejecta mass ratio ($E_{\rm K}/M_{\rm {ej}}$). This adds to the diversity of Type Ic supernovae. Although the early phase spectra are most similar to those of broad-line SN 2003jd, the [OI] line profile in the nebular spectrum of SN 2007ru shows the singly-peaked profile, in contrast to the doubly-peaked profile in SN 2003jd. The singly-peaked profile, together with the high luminosity and the high expansion velocity, may suggest that SN 2007ru could be an aspherical explosion viewed from the polar direction. Estimated oxygen abundance 12 + log(O/H) of $\sim$8.8 indicates that SN 2007ru occurred in a region with nearly solar metallicity.
Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs) are characterized by ultra-relativistic outflows, while supernovae are generally characterized by non-relativistic ejecta. GRB afterglows decelerate rapidly usually within days, because their low-mass ejecta rapidly sweep up a comparatively larger mass of circumstellar material. However supernovae, with heavy ejecta, can be in nearly free expansion for centuries. Supernovae were thought to have non-relativistic outflows except for few relativistic ones accompanied by GRBs. This clear division was blurred by SN 2009bb, the first supernova with a relativistic outflow without an observed GRB. Yet the ejecta from SN 2009bb was baryon loaded, and in nearly-free expansion for a year, unlike GRBs. We report the first supernova discovered without a GRB, but with rapidly decelerating mildly relativistic ejecta, SN 2012ap. We discovered a bright and rapidly evolving radio counterpart driven by the circumstellar interaction of the relativistic ejecta. However, we did not find any coincident GRB with an isotropic fluence of more than a sixth of the fluence from GRB 980425. This shows for the first time that central engines in type Ic supernovae, even without an observed GRB, can produce both relativistic and rapidly decelerating outflows like GRBs.
After the death of a runaway massive star, its supernova shock wave interacts with the bow shocks produced by its defunct progenitor, and may lose energy, momentum, and its spherical symmetry before expanding into the local interstellar medium (ISM). We investigate whether the initial mass and space velocity of these progenitors can be associated with asymmetric supernova remnants. We run hydrodynamical models of supernovae exploding in the pre-shaped medium of moving Galactic core-collapse progenitors. We find that bow shocks that accumulate more than about 1.5 Mo generate asymmetric remnants. The shock wave first collides with these bow shocks 160-750 yr after the supernova, and the collision lasts until 830-4900 yr. The shock wave is then located 1.35-5 pc from the center of the explosion, and it expands freely into the ISM, whereas in the opposite direction it is channelled into the region of undisturbed wind material. This applies to an initially 20 Mo progenitor moving with velocity 20 km/s and to our initially 40 Mo progenitor. These remnants generate mixing of ISM gas, stellar wind and supernova ejecta that is particularly important upstream from the center of the explosion. Their lightcurves are dominated by emission from optically-thin cooling and by X-ray emission of the shocked ISM gas. We find that these remnants are likely to be observed in the [OIII] lambda 5007 spectral line emission or in the soft energy-band of X-rays. Finally, we discuss our results in the context of observed Galactic supernova remnants such as 3C391 and the Cygnus Loop.
Models of core-collapse supernova explosions powered by the neutrino-driven mechanism have matured considerable in recent years. Explosions at the low-mass end of the progenitor spectrum can routinely be simulated in 1D, 2D, and 3D and allow us to study supernova nucleosynthesis based on first-principle models. Results of nucleosynthesis calculations indicate that supernovae of the lowest masses could be important contributors of some lighter n-rich elements beyond iron. The explosion mechanism of more massive stars is still under investigation, although first 3D models of neutrino-driven explosions employing multi-group neutrino transport have recently become available. Together with earlier 2D models and more simplified 3D simulations, these have elucidated the interplay between neutrino heating and hydrodynamic instabilities in the post-shock region that is essential for shock revival. However, some physical ingredients may still need to be added or improved before simulations can robustly explain supernova explosions over a wide mass range. We explore possible issues that may affect the accuracy of supernova simulations, and review some of the ideas that have recently been explored as avenues to robust explosions, including uncertainties in the neutrino rates, rapid rotation, and an external forcing of non-radial fluid motions by strong seed perturbations from convective shell burning. The perturbation-aided neutrino-driven mechanism and the implications of recent 3D simulations of shell burning in supernova progenitors are discussed in detail. The efficacy of the perturbation-aided mechanism is illustrated by the first successful multi-group neutrino hydrodynamics simulation of an 18 solar mass progenitor with 3D initial conditions. We conclude with speculations about the potential impact of 3D effects on the structure of massive stars through convective boundary mixing. (abridged)
During the accretion phase of a core-collapse supernovae, large amplitude turbulence is generated by the combination of the standing accretion shock instability and convection driven by neutrino heating. The turbulence directly affects the dynamics of the explosion, but there is also the possibility of an additional, indirect, feedback mechanism due to the effect turbulence can have upon neutrino flavor evolution and thus the neutrino heating. In this paper we consider the effect of turbulence during the accretion phase upon neutrino evolution, both numerically and analytically. Adopting representative supernova profiles taken from the accretion phase of a supernova simulation, we find the numerical calculations exhibit no effect from turbulence. We explain this absence using two analytic descriptions: the Stimulated Transition model and the Distorted Phase Effect model. In the Stimulated Transition model turbulence effects depend upon six different lengthscales, and three criteria must be satisfied between them if one is to observe a change in the flavor evolution due to Stimulated Transition. We further demonstrate that the Distorted Phase Effect depends upon the presence of multiple semi-adiabatic MSW resonances or discontinuities that also can be expressed as a relationship between three of the same lengthscales. When we examine the supernova profiles used in the numerical calculations we find the three Stimulated Transition criteria cannot be satisfied, independent of the form of the turbulence power spectrum, and that the same supernova profiles lack the multiple semi-adiabatic MSW resonances or discontinuities necessary to produce a Distorted Phase Effect. Thus we conclude that even though large amplitude turbulence is present in supernova during the accretion phase, it has no effect upon neutrino flavor evolution.
In this work we present and discuss the observations of the Mn abundances for 247 FGK dwarfs, located in the Galactic disc with metallicity -1<Fe/H]<+0.3. The observed stars belong to the substructures of the Galaxy thick and thin discs, and to the Hercules stream. The observations were conducted using the 1.93 m telescope at Observatoire de Haute-Provence (OHP, France) equipped with the echelle type spectrographs ELODIE and SOPHIE. The abundances were derived under the LTE approximation, with an average error for the [Mn/Fe] ratio of 0.10 dex. For most of the stars in the sample Mn abundances are not available in the literature. We obtain an evolution of [Mn/Fe] ratio with the metallicity [Fe/H] consistent with previous data compilations. In particular, within the metallicity range covered by our stellar sample the [Mn/Fe] ratio is increasing with the increase of metallicity. This due to the contribution to the Galactic chemical evolution of Mn and Fe from thermonuclear supernovae. We confirm the baseline scenario where most of the Mn in the Galactic disc and in the Sun is made by thermonuclear supernovae. In particular, the effective contribution from core-collapse supernovae to the Mn in the Solar system is about 10-20%. However, present uncertainties affecting the production of Mn and Fe in thermonuclear supernovae are limiting the constraining power of the observed [Mn/Fe] trend in the Galactic discs on, e.g., the frequency of different thermonuclear supernovae populations. The different production of these two elements in different types of thermonuclear supernovae needs to be disentangled by the dependence of their relative production on the metallicity of the supernova progenitor.
We present the photometric and spectroscopic evolution of the type Ic supernova LSQ14efd, discovered by the La Silla QUEST survey and followed by PESSTO. LSQ14efd was discovered few days after explosion and the observations cover up to ~100 days. The early photometric points show the signature of the cooling of the shock break-out event experienced by the progenitor at the time of the supernova explosion, one of the first for a type Ic supernova. A comparison with type Ic supernova spectra shows that LSQ14efd is quite similar to the type Ic SN 2004aw. These two supernovae have kinetic energies that are intermediate between standard Ic explosions and those which are the most energetic explosions known (e.g. SN 1998bw). We computed an analytical model for the light-curve peak and estimated the mass of the ejecta 6.3 +/- 0.5 Msun, a synthesized nickel mass of 0.25 Msun and a kinetic energy of Ekin = 5.6 +/- 0.5 x 10^51 erg. No connection between LSQ14efd and a GRB event could be established. However we point out that the supernova shows some spectroscopic similarities with the peculiar SN-Ia 1999ac and the SN-Iax SN 2008A. A core-collapse origin is most probable considering the spectroscopic, photometric evolution and the detection of the cooling of the shock break-out.
While the evolution of superbubbles driven by clustered supernovae has been studied by numerous authors, the resulting radial momentum yield is uncertain by as much as an order of magnitude depending on the computational methods and assumed properties of the surrounding interstellar medium (ISM). In this work, we study the origin of these discrepancies, and seek to determine the correct momentum budget for a homogeneous ISM. We carry out 3D hydrodynamic (HD) and magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations of clustered supernova explosions, using a Lagrangian method and checking for convergence with respect to resolution. We find that the terminal momentum of a shell driven by clustered supernovae is dictated primarily by the mixing rate across the contact discontinuity between the hot and cold phases, and that this energy mixing rate is dominated by numerical diffusion even at the highest resolution we can complete, 0.03 $M_\odot$. Magnetic fields also reduce the mixing rate, so that MHD simulations produce higher momentum yields than HD ones at equal resolution. As a result, we obtain only a lower limit on the momentum yield from clustered supernovae. Combining this with our previous 1D results, which provide an upper limit because they allow almost no mixing across the contact discontinuity, we conclude that the momentum yield per supernova from clustered supernovae in a homogeneous ISM is bounded between $2\times 10^5$ and $3\times 10^6$ $M_\odot$ km s$^{-1}$. A converged value for the simple homogeneous ISM remains elusive.
We introduce the first synthetic light-curve model set of Type IIP supernovae exploded within circumstellar media in which the acceleration of the red supergiant winds is taken into account. Because wind acceleration makes the wind velocities near the progenitors low, the density of the immediate vicinity of the red supergiant supernova progenitors can be higher than that extrapolated by using a constant terminal wind velocity. Therefore, even if the mass-loss rate of the progenitor is relatively low, it can have a dense circumstellar medium at the immediate stellar vicinity and the early light curves of Type IIP supernovae are significantly affected by it. We adopt a simple beta velocity law to formulate the wind acceleration. We provide bolometric and multicolor light curves of Type IIP supernovae exploding within such accelerated winds from the combinations of three progenitors, 12 - 16 Msun; five beta, 1-5; seven mass-loss rates, 1e-5 - 1e-2 Msun/yr; and four explosion energies, 0.5e51 - 2e51 erg. All the light curve models are available at https://goo.gl/o5phYb. When the circumstellar density is sufficiently high, our models do not show a classical shock breakout as a consequence of the interaction with the dense and optically-thick circumstellar media. Instead, they show a delayed 'wind breakout', substantially affecting early light curves of Type IIP supernovae. We find that the mass-loss rates of the progenitors need to be 1e-3 - 1e-2 Msun/yr to explain typical rise times of 5 - 10 days in Type IIP supernovae assuming a dense circumstellar radius of 1e15 cm.
We model the late evolution and mass loss history of rapidly rotating Wolf-Rayet stars in the mass range $5\,\rm{M}_{\odot}\dots 100\,\rm{M}_{\odot}$. We find that quasi-chemically homogeneously evolving single stars computed with enhanced mixing retain very little or no helium and are compatible with Type\,Ic supernovae. The more efficient removal of core angular momentum and the expected smaller compact object mass in our lower mass models lead to core spins in the range suggested for magnetar driven superluminous supernovae. Our more massive models retain larger specific core angular momenta, expected for long-duration gamma-ray bursts in the collapsar scenario. Due to the absence of a significant He envelope, the rapidly increasing neutrino emission after core helium exhaustion leads to an accelerated contraction of the whole star, inducing a strong spin-up, and centrifugally driven mass loss at rates of up to $10^{-2}\,\rm{M}_{\odot}~\rm{yr^{-1}}$ in the last years to decades before core collapse. Since the angular momentum transport in our lower mass models enhances the envelope spin-up, they show the largest relative amounts of centrifugally enforced mass loss, i.e., up to 25\% of the expected ejecta mass. Our most massive models evolve into the pulsational pair-instability regime. We would thus expect signatures of interaction with a C/O-rich circumstellar medium for Type~Ic superluminous supernovae with ejecta masses below $\sim 10\,\rm{M}_{\odot}$ and for the most massive engine-driven explosions with ejecta masses above $\sim 30\,\rm{M}_{\odot}$. Signs of such interaction should be observable at early epochs of the supernova explosion, and may be related to bumps observed in the light curves of superluminous supernovae, or to the massive circumstellar CO-shell proposed for Type~Ic superluminous supernova Gaia16apd.
Supernova neutrinos are crucially important to probe the final phases of massive star evolution. As is well known from observations of SN1987A, neutrinos provide information on the physical conditions responsible for neutron star formation and on the supernova explosion mechanism. However, there is still no complete understanding of the long-term evolution of neutrino emission in supernova explosions, although there are a number of modern simulations of neutrino radiation hydrodynamics, which study neutrino emission at times less than one second after the bounce. In the present work we systematically calculate the number of neutrinos that can be observed in Super-Kamiokande over periods longer than ten seconds using the database of Nakazato et al. (2013) anticipating that neutrinos from a Galactic supernova can be detected for several tens of seconds. We find that for a supernova at a distance of 10 kpc, neutrinos remain observable for longer than 30 s for a low-mass neutron star ($1.20M_\odot$ gravitational mass) and even longer than 100 s for a high-mass neutron star ($2.05M_\odot$). These scenarios are much longer than the observations of SN1987A and longer than the duration of existing numerical simulations. We propose a new analysis method based on the cumulative neutrino event distribution as a function of reverse time from the last observed event, as a useful probe of the neutron star mass. Our result demonstrates the importance of complete modeling of neutrino light curves in order to extract physical quantities essential for understanding supernova explosion mechanisms, such as the mass and radius of the resulting neutron star.
When applied to the blast wave formed by the explosion of a massive star as a supernova (SN), the theory of diffusive particle acceleration at shock fronts predicts a very high energy density in cosmic rays. Almost immediately after particles begin to be injected into the process, the cosmic ray pressure rises until comparable to the ram-pressure encountered by the shock front. Those supernovae which are observed in the radio band i.e., radio supernovae (RSNe), provide direct evidence of particle acceleration in the form of synchrotron emitting electrons. Furthermore, these objects are particularly interesting, since they are usually surrounded by a relatively dense confining medium. The acceleration of cosmic rays can then lead to the production of very high energy (VHE) gamma-rays which arise from collisions between energetic particles and target nuclei. We estimate the cosmic ray energy density assuming a fraction $\phi\lesim1$ of the energy available at the shock front is converted into cosmic rays. Combining this with the parameters describing the environment of the SN progenitor, as deduced from observations, and from more detailed modelling, we compute the flux at Earth $\tevflux$ of photons of energy above $1\,$TeV. For the relatively weak but nearby supernova SN1987A we predict $\tevflux=2\times10^{-13}\,\fluxunits$ before the shock front encounters the ring of dense matter seen by the Hubble Space Telescope. Subsequently, the flux is expected to rise further. The medium around SN1993J in M81 is thought to have a density
Solutions to the energy-independent (gray) radiative transfer equations are compared to results of Monte Carlo simulations of the \Ni and \Co radioactive decay \GR energy deposition in supernovae. The comparison shows that an effective, purely absorptive, gray opacity, \KG $\sim (0.06 \pm 0.01)Y_e$ cm$^2$ g$^{-1}$, where $Y_e$ is the total number of electrons per baryon, accurately describes the interaction of \GRs with the cool supernova gas and the local \GR energy deposition within the gas. The nature of the \GR\ interaction process (dominated by Compton scattering in the relativistic regime) creates a weak dependence of \KG on the optical thickness of the (spherically symmetric) supernova atmosphere: The maximum value of \KG applies during optically thick conditions when individual \GRs undergo multiple scattering encounters and the lower bound is reached at the phase characterized by a total Thomson optical depth to the center of the atmosphere \te \LA 1. Our results quantitatively confirm that the quick and efficient solution to the gray transfer problem provides an accurate representation of \GR energy deposition for a broad range of supernova conditions.
We present broad-band and spectropolarimetry of the Type Ia SN 1996X obtained on April 14, 1996 (UT), and broad-band polarimetry of SN 1996X on May 22,1996, when the supernova was about a week before and 4 weeks after optical maximum, respectively. The Stokes parameters derived from the broad-band polarimetry are consistent with zero polarization. The spectropolarimetry, however, shows broad spectral features which are due intrinsically to an asymmetric SN atmosphere. The spectral features in the flux spectrum and the polarization spectrum show correlations in the wavelength range from 4900 AA up to 5500 AA. The degree of this intrinsic component is low (<0.3 %). Theoretical polarization spectra have been calculated. It is shown that the polarization spectra are governed by line blending. Consequently, for similar geometrical distortions, the residual polarization is smaller by about a factor of 2 to 3 compared to the less blended Type II atmosphere, making it intrinsically harder to detect asphericities in SNIa. Comparison with theoretical model polarization spectra shows a resemblance to the observations. Taken literally, this implies an asphericity of about 11 % in the chemical distribution in the region of partial burning. This may not imperil the use of Type Ia supernovae as standard candles for distance determination, but nontheless poses a source of uncertainty. SN 1996X is the first Type Ia supernova for which spectropolarimetry revealed a polarized component intrinsic to the supernova and the first Type Ia with spectropolarimetry well prior to optical maximum.
The results of recent multi-dimensional simulations of type-II supernovae are reviewed. They show that convective instabilities in the collapsed stellar core might play an important role already during the first second after the formation of the supernova shock. Convectively unstable situations occur below and near the neutrinosphere as well as in the neutrino-heated region between the nascent neutron star and the supernova shock after the latter has stalled at a radius of typically 100-200 km.   While convective overturn in the layer of neutrino energy deposition clearly helps the explosion to develop and potentially provides an explanation of strong mantle and envelope mixing, asphericities, and non-uniform 56Ni distribution observed in supernova SN 1987A, its presence and importance depends on the strength of the neutrino heating and thus on the size of the neutrino fluxes from the neutron star. Convection in the hot-bubble region can only develop if the growth timescale of the instabilities and the heating timescale are both shorter than the accretion timescale of the matter advected through the stagnant shock. For too small neutrino luminosities this requirement is not fulfilled and convective activity cannot develop, leading to very weak explosions or even fizzling models, just as in the one-dimensional situation.   Convectively enhanced neutrino luminosities from the protoneutron star can therefore provide an essential condition for the explosion of the star. Very recent two-dimensional, self-consistent, general relativistic simulations of the cooling of a newly-formed neutron star demonstrate and confirm the possibility that Ledoux convection, driven by negative lepton number and
We investigate the pulsational properties of RSG models --- which we evolve from ZAMS masses in the range 10 to $20 \Msun$ --- by means of linear and non-linear calculations. We find period and growth rate of the dominant fundamental mode to increase with increasing luminosity-to-mass ratio $L/M$. Our models obtain relatively large $L/M$ values due to the inclusion of rotation in the evolutionary calculations; however, the largest values are obtained at and beyond central He-exhaustion due to major internal rearrangements of the nuclear burning regions. Our non-linear calculations as well as the behavior of the linear period and growth rate of the pulsations for periods approaching the Kelvin-Helmholtz time scale of the H-rich stellar envelope point towards the possibility of large amplitude pulsations. Such properties are similar to that found in AGB stars and suggest the possibility of a ``superwind'' to occur before the RSGs explode as supernovae. We conclude that changes in global stellar properties during the last few $10^4 \yr$ before core collapse may lead to drastic changes in the pulsational and wind properties of pre-supernova stars, with marked consequences for the immediate pre-supernova structure of the star and the circumstellar medium. We compare our results with observations of long-period OH/IR variables and discuss observational evidence for our scenario from observed supernova light curves, spectra and remnants.
We present the results of numerical studies of supernova remnant evolution and their effects on galactic and globular cluster evolution. We show that parameters such as the density and the metallicity of the environment significantly influence the evolution of the remnant, and thus change its effects on the global environment (e.g., globular clusters, galaxies) as a source of thermal and kinetic energy.   We conducted our studies using a one-dimensional hydrodynamics code, in which we implemented a metallicity dependent cooling function.   Global time-dependent quantities such as the total kinetic and thermal energies and the radial extent are calculated for a grid of parameter sets. The quantities calculated are the total energy, the kinetic energy, the thermal energy, the radial extent, and the mass. We distinguished between the hot, rarefied bubble and the cold, dense shell, as those two phases are distinct in their roles in a gas-stellar system.   We also present power-law fits to those quantities as a function of environmental parameters after the extensive cooling has ceased. The power-law fits enable simple incorporation of improved supernova energy input and matter redistribution (including the effect of the local conditions) in galactic/globular cluster models.   Our results for the energetics of supernova remnants in the late stages of their expansion give total energies ranging from 9e49 to 3e50 ergs, with a typical case being 1e50 erg, depending on the surrounding environment. About 8.5e49 erg of this energy can be found in the form of kinetic energy.   Supernovae play an important role in the evolution of the interstellar medium
Supernovae 1998bw and its corresponding relativistically expanding radio source are coincident with the \grb source GRB 980425. We show that of six recent SN Ib/c for which an outburst epoch can be estimated with some reliability, four have radio outbursts and all are correlated in time and space with BATSE \grbs. The joint probability of all six correlations is 1.5$\times10^{-5}$. No such correlation exists for SN Ia and SN II. The \gr\ energy associated with the SN/GRB events is $\sim10^{46} - 10^{48}$ ergs if emitted isotropically. Economy of hypotheses leads us to propose that all \grbs are associated with supernovae and that the \grb events have a quasi-isotropic component that cannot be observed at cosmological distances and a strongly collimated and Doppler-boosted component that can only be seen if looking nearly along the collimation axis. Such collimation requires a high rate of occurrence perhaps consistent with a supernova rate. The collimated flow may be generated by core collapse to produce rotating, magnetized neutron stars. All core collapse events may produce such jets, but only the ones that occur in supernovae with small or missing hydrogen envelopes, Type Ib or Ic, can propagate into the interstellar medium and yield a visible \grb. We suggest that asymmetries in line profiles and spectropolarimetry of SN II and SN Ib/c, pulsar runaway velocities, soft \gr repeaters and \grbs are associated phenomena.
We have estimated the dispersion of the inferred relative frequencies of Type-Ia and Type- II supernovae ($N_{Ia}/ N_{II}$) in our Galaxy by fitting the numerical results of supernova nucleosynthesis to the solar-system abundances. The ratio $N_{Ia}/ N_{II}$ is estimated to be 0.056--0.14, which is consistent with the observation, if the model of Woosley and Weaver (1995, WW95) is adopted for Type-II supernovae (SNe II). On the other hand, the upper limit of $N_{Ia}/ N_{II}$ becomes too large for the model of Hashimoto (1995, Ha95). However, Ha95 can fit the solar values better than WW95 as far as the abundant nuclei are concerned. These results mean that Ha95 can reproduce the main nuclei of the solar-system well and that WW95 can reproduce the solar values over a wide mass-number range. We also note that $N_{Ia}/ N_{II}$ tends to become smaller if the delayed detonation model is adopted for Type-Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). The dispersion of $N_{Ia}/ N_{II}$ obtained in the present investigation is larger than that concluded by Tsujimoto et al. (1995), which will have an influence on the estimate of the average life time of SNe Ia's progenitors and/or the star-formation rate history in our galaxy.
We explore the hypothesis, similar to one recently suggested by Bloom and colleagues, that some nearby supernovae are associated with smooth, single-pulse gamma-ray bursts, possibly having no emission above ~ 300 keV. We examine BATSE bursts with durations longer than 2 s, fitting those which can be visually characterized as single-pulse events with a lognormal pulse model. The fraction of events that can be reliably ascertained to be temporally and spectrally similar to the exemplar, GRB 980425 - possibly associated with SN 1998bw - is 4/1573 or 0.25%. This fraction could be as high as 8/1573 (0.5%) if the dimmest bursts are included. Approximately 2% of bursts are morphologically similar to GRB 980425 but have emission above ~ 300 keV. A search of supernova catalogs containing 630 detections during BATSE's lifetime reveals only one burst (GRB 980425) within a 3-month time window and within the total 3-sigma BATSE error radius that could be associated with a type Ib/c supernova. There is no tendency for any subset of single-pulse GRBs to fall near the Supergalactic Plane, whereas SNe of type Ib/c do show this tendency. Economy of hypotheses leads us to conclude that nearby supernovae generally are not related to smooth, single-pulse gamma-ray bursts.
Using results of nucleosynthesis calculations for theoretical core-collapse supernova models with various progenitor's masses, it is shown that abundance patterns of C, Mg, Si, Ca, and H seen in extremely metal-deficient stars with [Fe/H] < -2.5 follow those seen in the individual first generation supernova remnants (SNRs). This suggests that most of the stars with [Fe/H] < -2.5 were made from individual supernova (SN) events. To obtain the ratio of heavy elements to hydrogen, a formula is derived to estimate the mass of hydrogen swept up by a SNR when it occurs in the interstellar matter with the primordial abundances. We use [Mg/H] to indicate the metallicities instead of [Fe/H]. The metallicities [Mg/H] predicted from these SNRs range from ~-4 to ~-1.5 and the mass of Mg in a SN is well correlated with its progenitor's mass. Thus the observed [Mg/H] in an extremely metal deficient star has a correspondence to the progenitor's mass. A larger [Mg/H] corresponds to a larger progenitor's mass. Therefore, so called `age-metallicity relation' does not hold for stars with [Fe/H] < -2.5. In contrast, the [Mg/Fe] ratios in the theoretical SNRs have a different trend from those in extremely metal-deficient stars. It is also shown that the observed trend of [Mg/Fe] can predict the Fe yield of each SN given the correspondence of [Mg/H] to the progenitor's mass. The Fe yields thus obtained are consistent with those derived from SN light curve analyses. This indicates that there is still a problem in modelling a core-collapse supernova at its beginning of explosion or mass cut.
We explore the effects on nucleosynthesis in Type II supernovae of various parameters (mass cut, neutron excess, explosion energy, progenitor mass) in order to explain the observed trends of the iron-peak element abundance ratios ([Cr/Fe], [Mn/Fe], [Co/Fe] and [Ni/Fe]) in halo stars as a function of metallicity for the range $ -4 \le$ [Fe/H] $\le -2.5$. [Cr/Fe] and [Mn/Fe] decrease with decreasing [Fe/H], while [Co/Fe] behaves the opposite way and increases. We show that such a behavior can be explained by a variation of mass cuts in Type II supernovae as a function of progenitor mass, which provides a changing mix of nucleosynthesis from an alpha-rich freeze-out of Si-burning and incomplete Si-burning. This explanation is consistent with the amount of ejected $^{56}$Ni determined from modeling the early light curves of individual supernovae. We also suggest that the ratio [H/Fe] of halo stars is mainly determined by the mass of interstellar hydrogen mixed with the ejecta of a single supernova which is larger for larger explosion energy and the larger Str\"omgren radius of the progenitor.
Within the framework of star formation in starburst galaxies undergoing interactions, connections among the red quasars, the BL Lacs, and the Blazars with the gamma-ray bursts are discussed in the light of the "hypernovae" scenario. It is proposed that the gamma-ray bursts occur primarily in the star formation regions in starburst environments, and arise from the core-collapse of super-massive Wolf-Rayet stars, that are formed in interacting systems. In this interacting environment star formations cause supernovae explosions. As the stars explode, shock waves propagate outward and collide with the ambient medium, forming a high-density super-shell, where intense star formation begins; subsequently supernovae explosions within the shell cause an outward expansion of the shell. In another scenario of star formation the interactions among the large gas-rich low-surface brightness (LSB) spiral galaxies give rise to fragmentation of their tidal tails. These fragmented clouds collapse to compact dwarfs, which undergo rapid star formation. In such a scenario of interactions, where most quasars are observed, we discuss the MgII absorption lines in GRB 970508, whose spectra resemble a BL Lac object, and the spectral evolution of GRB 971214 that may also indicate a similar connection. Beside the BL Lac connection, the recent discovery of GRB 980425 in a nearby galaxy indicates asymmetric supernovae explosions that give rise to relativistic jets. We propose that the gamma-ray light curves arise due to inverse Compton scattering of soft-photons from precessing relativistic blobs of plasma moving in jets. This brings into light the mechanisms of supernova explosions, that give birth to relativistic jets.
Live $^{60}$Fe has recently been reported in a deep-ocean ferromanganese crust. Analysis of the isotopic ratios in the sample suggests that the measured $^{60}$Fe abundance exceeds the levels generated by terrestrial and cosmogenic sources, and it has been proposed that the excess of $^{60}$Fe is a signature of a supernova that exploded near the earth several Myr ago. In this paper, we consider the possible background sources, and confirm that the measured $^{60}$Fe is significantly higher than all known backgrounds, in contrast with the reported abundance of live $^{53}$Mn. We discuss scenarios in which the data are consistent with a supernova event at a distance $D \sim 30$ pc and an epoch $t_{\rm SN} \sim 5$ Myr ago. We propose tests that could confirm or refute the interpretation of the $^{60}$Fe discovery, including searches for $^{10}$Be, $^{129}$I and $^{146}$Sm. Such a nearby supernova event might have had some impact on the earth's biosphere, principally by enhancing the cosmic-ray flux. This might have damaged the earth's ozone layer, enhancing the penetration of solar ultraviolet radiation. In this connection, we comment on the Middle Miocene and Pliocene mini-extinction events. We also speculate on the possibility of a supernova-induced "cosmic-ray winter," if cosmic rays play a significant role in seeding cloud formation.
In view of the application to supernova simulations, we calculate neutrino reaction rates with nucleons via the neutral and charged currents in the supernova core in the relativistic random phase approximation (RPA) and study their effects on the opacity of the supernova core. The formulation is based on the Lagrangian employed in the calculation of nuclear equation of state (EOS) in the relativistic mean field theory (RMF). The nonlinear meson terms are treated appropriately so that the consistency of the density correlation derived in RPA with the thermodynamic derivative obtained from EOS by RMF is satisfied in the static and long wave length limit. We employ pion and rho meson exchange interactions together with the phenomenological Landau-Migdal parameters for the isospin-dependent nuclear interactions. We find that both the charged and neutral current reaction rates are suppressed from the standard Bruenn's approximate formula considerably in the high density regime. In the low density regime, on the other hand, the vector current contribution to the neutrino-nucleon scattering rate is enhanced in the vicinity of the boundary of the liquid-gas phase transition, while the other contributions are moderately suppressed there also. In the high temperature regime or in the regime where electrons have a large chemical potential, the latter of which is important only for the electron capture process and its inverse process, the recoil of nucleons cannot be neglected and further reduces the reaction rates with respect to the standard approximate formula which discards any energy transfer in the processes. These issues could have a great impact on the neutrino heating mechanism of collapse-driven supernovae.
We have analyzed the kinematical parameters of Cir X-1 to constrain the nature of its companion star, the eccentricity of the binary and the pre-supernova parameter space. We argue that the companion is most likely to be a low-mass (< 2.0 M_sun) unevolved star and that the eccentricity of the orbit is 0.94 +/- 0.04. We have evaluated the dynamical effects of the supernova explosion and we find it must have been asymmetric. On average, we find that a kick of 740 km/s is needed to account for the recently measured radial velocity of +430 km/s (Johnston, Fender & Wu) for this extreme system. The corresponding minimum kick velocity is 500 km/s. This is the largest kick needed to explain the motion of any observed binary system. If Cir X-1 is associated with the supernova remnant G321.9-0.3 then we find a limiting minimum age of this remnant of 60000 yr. Furthermore, we predict that the companion star has lost 10% of its mass as a result of stripping and ablation from the impact of the supernova shell shortly after the explosion.
The spectra of type IIn supernovae indicate the presence of apre-existing slow, dense circumstellar wind (CSW). If the CSW extends sufficiently far from the progenitor star, then dust formation should occur in the wind. The light from the supernova explosion will scatter off this dust and produce a light echo. Continuum emission seen after the peak will have contributions from both this echo as well as from the shock of the ejecta colliding with the CSW, with a fundamental question of which source dominates the continuum. We calculate the brightness of the light echo as a function of time for a range of dust shell geometries, and use our calculations to fit to the light curves of SN 1988Z and SN 1997ab, the two slowest declining IIn supernovae on record. We find that the light curves of both objects can be reproduced by the echo model. However, their rate of decay from peak, color at peak and their observed peak absolute magnitudes when considered together are inconsistent with the echo model. Furthermore, when the observed values of M$_{B}$ are corrected for the effects of dust scattering, the values obtained imply that these supernovae have unrealistically high luminosities. We conclude that light echoes cannot properly account for the slow decline seen in some IIn's, and that the shock interaction is likely to dominate the continuum emission.
We discuss the optical spectropolarimetry of several core-collapse supernovae, SN 1996cb (Type IIB), SN 1997X (Type Ic), and SN 1998S (Type IIn). The data show polarization evolution of several spectral features at levels from 0.5% to above 4%. The observed line polarization is intrinsic to the supernovae and not of interstellar origin. These data suggest that the the distribution of ejected matter is highly aspherical. In the case of SN 1998S, the minimum major to minor axis ratio must be larger than 2.5 to 1 if the polarization is 3% from an oblate spheroidal ejecta seen edge on. A well-defined symmetry axis can be deduced from spectropolarimetry for the peculiar Type IIn supernova SN 1998S but the Type IIB events SN 1993J and SN 1996cb seem to possess much more complicated geometries with polarization position angles showing larger irregular variations across spectral features; the latter may be associated with large scale clumpiness of the ejecta. The observed degree of polarization of the Type Ic SN 1997X is above 5%. The data reveal a trend that the degree of polarization increases with decreasing envelope mass and with the depth within the ejecta. We speculate that Type IIB, Type Ib, and Type Ic may be very similar events viewed from different aspect angles.   The high axial ratio of the ejecta is difficult to explain in terms of the conventional neutrino driven core-collapse models for Type II explosions. Highly asymmetric explosion mechanisms such as the formation of bipolar jets during core-collapse may be a necessary ingredient for models of all core-collapse supernovae.
We perform binary population synthesis calculations to study the origin and the characteristics of runaway O and B stars which are ejected by the supernova explosion of the companion star in a binary system. The number of OB runaways can be explained from supernova ejections only if: high mass stars are preferentially formed in binaries, the initial mass ratio distribution is strongly peaked to unity and stars are rejuvenated to zero age upon accretion of mass from a companion star. Taking these requirements into consideration we conclude that at most 30% of the runaway O stars but possibly all runaway B stars obtain high velocities due to supernovae in evolving binaries. Stars which obtain high velocities via supernova ejections have the following characteristics: 1) at least 10% of the high velocity B stars and half the O stars have a mass greater than the turn off mass of the cluster in which they are born and would be observed as blue stragglers in the parent cluster, 2) their equatorial rotational velocities are proportional to their space velocity and 3) between 20% and 40% of the runaways have neutron star companions but less than 1% are visible as radio pulsars in part of the orbit.
Based on our high resolution, two-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations, we propose that large cavities may be formed by the nonlinear development of the combined thermal and gravitational instabilities, without need for stellar energy injection in a galaxy modeling the Large Magellanic Clouds (LMC). Our numerical model of the star formation allows us to follow the evolution of the blastwaves due to supernovae in the inhomogeous, multi-phase, and turbulent-like media self-consistently. Formation of kpc-scale inhomogeneity, such as cavities, observed HI map of the LMC, is suppressed by frequent supernovae (average supernova rate for the whole disk is ~0.001/yr). However the supernova explosions are necessary for the hot component (T_g > 10^{6-7} K). Position-velocity maps show that kpc-scale shells/arcs formed through the nonlinear evolution in a model without stellar energy feedback has similar kinematics to explosional phenomena, such as supernovae. We also find that dense clumps and filamentary structure are formed due to a natural consequence of the non-linear evolution of the multi-phage ISM. Although the ISM in a small scale looks turbulent-like and transient, the global structure of the ISM is quasi-stable. We compare the observations of HI and molecular gas of the LMC with the numerically obtained HI and CO map. The morphology and statistical properties of the numerical HI and CO maps are discussed.
We present the EROS nearby supernova ($z \sim 0.02 - 0.2$) search and the analysis of the first year of data (1997). A total of 80 square degrees were surveyed. Eight supernov{\ae} were detected, four of which were spectroscopically identified as type Ia supernov{\ae}. The search efficiency was determined with a Monte-Carlo simulation taking into account the efficiencies for both supernova detection and host galaxy identification. Assuming that for a given galaxy the supernova rate is proportional to the galactic luminosity, we compute a type Ia supernova explosion rate of:   ${\cal R} = 0.44 {}_{-0.21}^{+0.35} {}_{-0.07}^{+0.13} h^2: / 10^{10}   \lbsun / 100 {\rm yrs}$ at an average redshift of $\sim 0.1$ where the errors are respectively statistical and systematic (type misidentification included).
Distant Type Ia and II supernovae (SNe) can serve as valuable probes of the history of the cosmic expansion and star formation, and provide important information on their progenitor models. At present, however, there are few observational constraints on the abundance of SNe at high redshifts. A major science driver for the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST) is the study of such very distant supernovae. In this paper we discuss strategies for finding and counting distant SNe by using repeat imaging of super-critical intermediate redshift clusters whose mass distributions are well-constrained via modelling of strongly-lensed features. For a variety of different models for the star formation history and supernova progenitors, we estimate the likelihood of detecting lensed SNe as a function of their redshift. In the case of a survey conducted with HST, we predict a high probability of seeing a supernova in a single return visit with either WFPC-2 or ACS, and a much higher probability of detecting examples with z>1 in the lensed case. Most events would represent magnified SNe II at z~1, and a fraction will be more distant examples. We discuss various ways to classify such events using ground-based infrared photometry. We demonstrate an application of the method using the HST archival data and discuss the case of a possible event found in the rich cluster AC 114 (z=0.31).
We report on SN 1997bs in NGC 3627 (M66), the first supernova discovered by the Lick Observatory Supernova Search using the 0.75-m Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope (KAIT). Based on its early-time optical spectrum, SN 1997bs was classified as Type IIn. However, from the BVRI light curves obtained by KAIT early in the supernova's evolution, and F555W and F814W light curves obtained from Hubble Space Telescope archival WFPC2 images at late times, we question the identification of SN 1997bs as a bona fide supernova. We believe that it is more likely a super-outburst of a very massive luminous blue variable star, analogous to Eta Carinae, and similar to SN 1961V in NGC 1058 (Filippenko et al. 1995 [AJ, 110, 2261]) and SN 1954J (``Variable 12'') in NGC 2403 (Humphreys & Davidson 1994 [PASP, 106, 1025]). The progenitor may have survived the outburst, since the SN is seen in early 1998 at m_F555W=23.4, about 0.5 mag fainter than the progenitor identified by Van Dyk et al. (1999, [AJ, 118, 2331]) in a pre-discovery image. Based on analysis of its environment in the Hubble Space Telescope images, the progenitor was not in an H II region or association of massive stars. The recent discovery of additional objects with properties similar to those of SN 1997bs suggests that the heterogeneous class of Type IIn supernovae consists in part of ``impostors.''
A new method for measuring gravitational lensing with high redshift type Ia supernovae is investigated. The method utilizes correlations between foreground galaxies and supernova brightnesses to substantially reduce possible systematic errors and increase the signal to noise ratio. It is shown that this lensing signal can be related to the mass, size and substructure of galaxy halos and galaxy clusters if dark matter consists of microscopic particles. This technique may be particularly useful for measuring the size of dark matter halos, a measurement to which the lensing of galaxies is not well suited, and for measuring the level of substructure in galaxy halos, a problematic prediction of the cold dark matter model. The contributions to the signal from galaxy halos and galaxy clusters are modeled and contributions to the noise from fluctuations in the galaxy number counts, galaxy redshift error, dispersion in SN luminosities and sample variance are estimated. The intrinsic distribution of supernova luminosities and its redshift evolution are removed as major sources of uncertainty. The method is found to be complimentary to galaxy--galaxy lensing. The required observations of $\simgt 100$ supernovae have already been proposed for the purposes of cosmological parameter estimation.
The $\gamma$-ray background from supernovae is calculated on the basis of the reconstructed efficiency of supernova explosions from star formation at various redshifts. The calculations presented here show how Type Ia SN rates compatible with the results of optical supernova searches give a background emission in the MeV range that can explain the extragalactic emission measured by COMPTEL and SMM. Star formation histories reaching maximum values of 0.3-0.4 M$_{\odot}$ yr$^{-1}$ Mpc$^{-3}$ at z$\sim$ 1.5 (and/or possibly keeping that value to higher z) give a $\gamma$-ray background compatible with observations while they also predict the observed supernova rates per comoving volume. The $\gamma$-ray background in the MeV range is mostly sensitive to the star formation rate at z$\sim$ 1-2, but the activity in forming stars at even higher z has an influence as well on the absolute level of the cosmic $\gamma$-ray background: the time elapsed by the SNe Ia progenitors until they explode has a broad distribution and the rates of SNe Ia at z$\sim$ 1.5-2 depend on the formation frequencies of their progenitor stars at earlier epochs.   The mutual consistency of predictions of optical rates and integrated emission in the $\gamma$-ray domain place in a firm ground the Type Ia supernova identification as the astrophysical source responsible for this cosmic background
Observations of high redshift supernovae imply an accelerating Universe which can only be explained by an unusual energy component such as vacuum energy or quintessence. To assess the ability of current and future supernova data to constrain the properties of the dark energy, we allow its density to have arbitrary time-dependence, $\rho_X(z)$. This leads to an equation of state for the dark energy, $w_X(z)=p_X(z)/\rho_X(z)$, which is a free function of redshift $z$. We find that current type Ia supernova (SNe Ia) data are consistent with a cosmological constant, with large uncertainties at $z\ga 0.5$. We show that $\rho_X(z)/\rho_X(z=0)$ can be measured reasonably well to about $z=1.5$ using type Ia supernova data from realistic future SN Ia pencil beam surveys, provided that the weak energy condition (energy density of matter is nonnegative for any observer) is imposed.   While it is only possible to differentiate between different models (say, quintessence and k-essence) at $z \la 1.5$ using realistic data, the correct trend in the time-dependence of the dark energy density can be clearly detected out to $z=2$, even in the presence of plausible systematic effects. This would allow us to determine whether the dark energy is a cosmological constant, or some exotic form of energy with a time-dependent density.
Masses and progenitor evolutionary states of TypeII supernovae remain almost unconstrained by direct observations. Only one robust observation of a progenitor (SN1987A) and one plausible observation (SN1993J) are available. Neither matched theoretical predictions and in this Letter we report limits on a third progenitor (SN1999gi). The Hubble Space Telescope has imaged the site of the TypeII-P supernova SN1999gi with the WFPC2 in two filters (F606W and F300W) prior to explosion. The distance to the host galaxy (NGC3184) of 7.9Mpc means that the most luminous, massive stars are resolved as single objects in the archive images. The supernova occurred in a resolved, young OB association 2.3kpc from the centre of NGC3184 with an association age of about 4Myrs. Follow-up images of SN1999gi with WFPC2 taken 14 months after discovery determine the precise position of the SN on the pre-explosion frames. An upper limit of the absolute magnitude of the progenitor is estimated (M_v >= -5.1). By comparison with stellar evolutionary tracks this can be interpreted as a stellar mass, and we determine an upper mass limit of 9(+3/-2)M_solar. We discuss the possibility of determining the masses or mass limits for numerous nearby core-collapse supernovae using the HST archive enhanced by our current SNAP programme.
We propose that the pulsar nebula associated with the pulsar J2229+6114 and the supernova remnant (SNR) G106.3+2.7 are the result of the same supernova explosion. The whole structure is located at the edge of an HI bubble with extended regions of molecular gas inside. The radial velocities of both the atomic hydrogen and the molecular material suggest a distance of 800 pc. At this distance the SNR is 14 pc long and 6 pc wide. Apparently the bubble was created by the stellar wind and supernova explosions of a group of stars in its center which also triggered the formation of the progenitor star of G106.3+2.7. The progenitor star exploded at or close to the current position of the pulsar, which is at one end of the SNR rather than at its center. The expanding shock wave of the supernova explosion created a comet shaped supernova remnant by running into dense material and then breaking out into the inner part of the HI bubble. A synchrotron nebula with a shell-like structure (the ``Boomerang'') of length 0.8 pc was created by the pulsar wind interacting with the dense ambient medium. The expanding shock wave created an HI shell of mass 0.4 Msun around this nebula by ionizing the atomic hydrogen in its vicinity.
We investigate the potential of a future supernovae data set, as might be obtained by the proposed SNAP satellite, to discriminate between two possible explanations for the observed dimming of the high redshift type IA supernovae, namely either (i) a cosmological evolution for which the expansion of the universe has been accelerating for a substantial range of redshifts $z\goesas1$; or (ii) an unexpected supernova luminosity evolution over such a redshift range. By evaluating Bayes factors we show that within the context of spatially flat model universes with a dark energy the future SNAP data set should be able to discriminate these two possibilities. Our calculations assume particular cosmological models with a quintessence field in the form of a dynamical pseudo Nambu--Goldstone boson (PNGB), and a simple empirical model of the evolution of peak luminosities of the supernovae sources which has been recently discussed in the literature. We also show that the fiducial SNAP data set, simulated with the assumption of no source evolution, is able to discriminate the PNGB model from a number of other spatially flat quintessence models which have been widely studied in the literature, namely those with inverse power--law, simple exponential and double--exponential potentials.
We present a Bayesian analysis of the energies and arrival times of the neutrinos from supernova SN 1987A detected by the Kamiokande II, IMB, and Baksan detectors, and find strong evidence for two components in the neutrino signal: a long time scale component from thermal Kelvin-Helmholtz cooling of the nascent neutron star, and a brief (~< 1 s), softer component similar to that expected from emission by accreting material in the delayed supernova scenario. In the context of this model, we show that the data constrain the electron antineutrino rest mass to be less than 5.7 eV with 95% probability. Our analysis takes advantage of significant advances that have occured in the years since the detections in both our understanding of the supernova mechanism and our ability to analyze sparse data. As a result there are substantial differences between our inferences and those found in earlier studies. We find that two-component models for the neutrino signal make the data >100 times more probable than single-component models. In addition, the radius and binding energy of the nascent neutron star implied by single-component models deviates significantly from the values predicted by current neutron star models, whereas those implied by models with an accretion component are in complete agreement with the predictions. As a result, two-component models are hundreds to thousands of times more probable than single-component models. The neutrino data thus provide the first direct observational evidence in favor of the delayed supernova scenario over the prompt scenario. (Abridged abstract)
We have observed two fields - Field-I (l=3.2 degrees, b=-1.0 degree) and Field-II (l=356.8 degrees, b=-0.1 degree) with the Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope (GMRT) at 330 MHz. In the first field, we have studied the candidate supernova remnant (SNR) G3.1-0.6 and based on its observed morphology, spectral index and polarisation confirmed it to be an SNR. We find this supernova to have a double ring appearance with a strip of emission on it's western side passing through it's centre.   We have discovered two extended curved objects in the second field, which appears to be part of a large shell like structure. It is possibly the remains of an old supernova in the region. Three suspected supernova remnants, G356.3-0.3, G356.6+0.1 and G357.1-0.2 detected in the MOST 843 MHz survey of the Galactic Centre region appears to be located on this shell like structure. While both G356.3-0.3 and G356.6+0.1 seem to be parts of this shell, G357.1-0.2 which has a steeper spectrum above 1 GHz, could be a background SNR seen through the region. Our HI absorption observation towards the candidate SNR G357.1-0.2 indicates that it is at a distance of more than 6 kpc from us.
Using observations from an extensive monitoring campaign with the Hubble Space Telescope we present the detection of an intermediate-time flux excess which is redder in color relative to the afterglow of GRB 011121, currently distinguished as the gamma-ray burst with the lowest known redshift. The red ``bump,'' which exhibits a spectral roll-over at ~7200 Angstrom, is well described by a redshifted Type Ic supernova that occurred approximately at the same time as the gamma-ray burst event. The inferred luminosity is about half that of the bright supernova 1998bw. These results serve as compelling evidence for a massive star origin of long-duration gamma-ray bursts. Models that posit a supernova explosion weeks to months preceding the gamma-ray burst event are excluded by these observations. Finally, we discuss the relationship between spherical core-collapse supernovae and gamma-ray bursts.
Supernova 1998bu in the galaxy M96 was observed by COMPTEL for a total of 88 days starting 17 days after the explosion. We searched for a signal in the 847 keV and 1238 keV lines of radioactive 56Co from this type Ia supernova. Using several different analysis methods, we did not detect SN1998bu. Our measurements should have been sensitive enough to detect 60Co gamma-rays as predicted from supernova models. Our 2-sigma flux limit is 2.3 10^{-5} photons cm^{-2} s^{-1}; this would correspond to 0.35 solar mass of ejected 56Ni, if SN1998bu were at a distance of 11.3 Mpc and transparent to MeV gamma rays for the period of our measurements. We discuss our measurements in the context of common supernova models, and conclude disfavoring a supernova event with large mixing and major parts of the freshly-generated radioactivity in outer layers.
We investigate p-process nucleosynthesis in a supercritical accretion disk around a compact object of 1.4 M_solar, using the self-similar solution of an optically thick advection dominated flow. Supercritical accretion is expected to occur in a supernova with fallback material accreting onto a new-born compact object. It is found that appreciable amounts of p-nuclei are synthesized via the p-process in supernova-driven supercritical accretion disks (SSADs) when the accretion rate m_dot = M_dot c^2/(16 L_Edd) >10^5, where L_Edd is the Eddington luminosity. Abundance profiles of p-nuclei ejected from SSADs have similar feature to those of the oxygen/neon layers in Type II supernovae when the abundance of the fallback gas far from the compact object is that of the oxygen/neon layers in the progenitor. The overall abundance profile is in agreement with that of the solar system. Some p-nuclei, such as Mo, Ru, Sn, and La, are underproduced in the SSADs as in Type II supernovae. If the fallback gas is mixed with a small fraction of proton through Rayleigh-Taylor instability during the explosion, significant amounts of Mo92 are produced inside the SSADs. Ru96 and La138 are also produced when the fallback gas contains abundant proton though the overall abundance profile of p-nuclei is rather different from that of the solar system. The p-process nucleosynthesis in SSADs contributes to chemical evolution of p-nuclei, in particular Mo92, if several percents of fallback matter are ejected via jets and/or winds.
We present the results of a large grid of synthetic spectra and compare them to early spectroscopic observations of SN 1993W. This supernova was discovered close to its explosion date and at a recession velocity of 5400 km/s is located in the Hubble flow. We focus here on two early spectra that were obtained approximately 5 and 9 days after explosion. We parameterize the outer supernova envelope as a power-law density profile in homologous expansion. In order to extract information on the value of the parameters a large number of models was required. We show that very early spectra combined with detailed models can provide constraints on the value of the power law index, the ratio of hydrogen to helium in the surface of the progenitor, the progenitor metallicity and the amount of radioactive nickel mixed into the outer envelope of the supernova. The spectral fits reproduce the observed spectra exceedingly well. The spectral results combined with the early photometry predict that the explosion date was 4.7 \pm 0.7 days before the first spectrum was obtained. The ability to obtain the metallicity from early spectra make SN IIP attractive probes of chemical evolution in the universe and by showing that we have the ability to pin down the parameters of the progenitor and mixing during the supernova explosion, it is likely to make SN IIP useful cosmological distance indicators which are at the same time complementary to SNe Ia.
We present HST/NICMOS [FeII]1.644micron, Pa-alpha (1.87micron) and continuum images of the starburst galaxies M82 and NGC253 at an unprecedented spatial resolution. In both galaxies we detect [FeII] compact sources superimposed on a diffuse background in the disk of the galaxies together with a component above and below the plane of the galaxy. The radio and [FeII] emissions perpendicular to the disk of M82 show a remarkable similarity to each other, suggesting that both emissions originate in shocks from supernova explosions. We find a spatial correspondence between bright compact [FeII] emitting regions and the location of radio supernova remnants (SNR) for approximately 30-50% of radio SNRs in M82 and NGC253. This lack of a one-to-one correspondence, more than being indicative of a different origin for the radio and [FeII] emission in starbursts, suggests two populations of SNRs: an older population(<10^4yr) traced by the [FeII] emission and a younger population (a few hundred years old) traced by the radio SNRs. We therefore conclude that the [FeII] emission in starburst galaxies provides a good estimate of the supernova activity. Using our newly determined [FeII] luminosities (corrected for extinction) of M82 and NGC253, we reevaluate the calibration of the supernova rate in terms of the [FeII] luminosity for starburst galaxies.
It has been proposed theoretically that the first generation of stars in the Universe (population III) would be as massive as 100 solar masses (100Mo), because of inefficient cooling of the precursor gas clouds. Recently, the most iron-deficient (but still carbon-rich) low-mass star -- HE0107-5240 -- was discovered. If this is a population III that gained its metals (elements heavier than helium) after its formation, it would challenge the theoretical picture of the formation of the first stars. Here we report that the patterns of elemental abundance in HE0107-5240 (and other extremely metal-poor stars) are in good accord with the nucleosynthesis that occurs in stars with masses of 20-130Mo when they become supernovae if, during the explosions, the ejecta undergo substantial mixing and fall-back to form massive black holes. Such supernovae have been observed. The abundance patterns are not, however, consistent with enrichment by supernovae from stars in the range 130-300 Mo. We accordingly infer that the first-generation supernovae came mostly from explosions of ~ 20-130Mo stars; some of these produced iron-poor but carbon- and oxygen-rich ejecta. Low-mass second-generation stars, like HE0107-5240, could form because the carbon and oxygen provided pathways for gas to cool.
We present new mechanisms by which the isotopic compositions of X-type grains of presolar SiC are altered by reverse shocks in Type II supernovae. We address three epochs of reverse shocks: pressure wave from the H envelope near t = 10$^6$s; reverse shock from the presupernova wind near 10$^8-10^9$s; reverse shock from the ISM near 10$^{10}$s. Using 1-D hydrodynamics we show that the first creates a dense shell of Si and C atoms near 10$^6$s in which the SiC surely condenses. The second reverse shock causes precondensed grains to move rapidly forward through decelerated gas of different isotopic composition, during which implantation, sputtering and further condensation occur simultaneously. The third reverse shock causes only further ion implantation and sputtering, which may affect trace element isotopic compositions. Using a 25M$_{\odot}$ supernova model we propose solutions to the following unsolved questions: where does SiC condense?; why does SiC condense in preference to graphite?; why is condensed SiC $^{28}$Si-rich?; why is O richness no obstacle to SiC condensation?; how many atoms of each isotope are impacted by a grain that condenses at time t$_0$ at radial coordinate r$_0$? These many considerations are put forward as a road map for interpreting SiC X grains found in meteorites and their meaning for supernova physics.
We show empirically that fits to the color-magnitude relation of Type Ia supernovae after optical maximum can provide accurate relative extragalactic distances. We report the discovery of an empirical color relation for Type Ia light curves: During much of the first month past maximum, the magnitudes of Type Ia supernovae defined at a given value of color index have a very small magnitude dispersion; moreover, during this period the relation between $B$ magnitude and $B-V$ color (or $B-R$ or $B-I$ color) is strikingly linear, to the accuracy of existing well-measured data. These linear relations can provide robust distance estimates, in particular, by using the magnitudes when the supernova reaches a given color. After correction for light curve strech factor or decline rate, the dispersion of the magnitudes taken at the intercept of the linear color-magnitude relation are found to be around 0$^m$.08 for the sub-sample of supernovae with \BVm $\le 0^m.05$, and around 0$^m$.11 for the sub-sample with \BVm $\le 0^m.2$. This small dispersion is consistent with being mostly due to observational errors. The method presented here and the conventional light curve fitting methods can be combined to further improve statistical dispersions of distance estimates. It can be combined with the magnitude at maximum to deduce dust extinction. The slopes of the color-magnitude relation may also be used to identify intrinsically different SN Ia systems. The method provides a tool that is fundamental to using SN Ia to estimate cosmological parameters such as the Hubble constant and the mass and dark energy content of the universe.
We present calculations indicating the possibility of a new class of Type I supernovae. In this new paradigm relativistic terms enhance the self gravity of a carbon-oxygen white dwarf as it passes or orbits near a black hole. This relativistic compression can cause the central density to exceed the threshold for pycnonuclear reactions so that athermonuclear runaway ensues. We consider three possible environments: 1) white dwarfs orbiting a low-mass black hole; 2) white dwarfs encountering a massive black hole in a dense globular cluster; and 3) white dwarfs passing a supermassive black hole in a dense galactic core. We estimate the rate at which such events could occur out to a redshift of z = 1. Event rates are estimated to be significantly less than the rate of normal Type Ia supernovae for all three classes. Nevertheless, such events may be frequent enough to warrant a search for this new class of supernova. We propose several observable signatures which might be used to identify this type of event and speculate that such an event might have produced the observed "mixed-morphology" Sgr A East supernova remnant in the Galactic core.
The astrophysical nature of r-process sites is a long standing mystery and many probable sources have been suggested in the past, among them lower-mass core-collapse supernovae (in the range 8 - 10 Msol), higher-mass core-collapse supernovae (with masses > 20 Msol) and neutron star mergers. In this work, we present a detailed inhomogeneous chemical evolution study that considers for the first time neutron star mergers as major r-process sources, and compare this scenario to the ones in which core-collapse supernovae act as dominant r-process sites. We conclude that, due to the lack of reliable iron and r-process yields as function of progenitor mass, it is not possible at present to distinguish between the lower-mass and higher-mass supernovae scenarios within the framework of inhomogeneous chemical evolution. However, neutron-star mergers seem to be ruled out as the dominant r-process source, since their low rates of occurrence would lead to r-process enrichment that is not consistent with observations at very low metallicities. Additionally, the considerable injection of r-process material by a single neutron-star merger leads to a scatter in [r-process/Fe] ratios at later times which is much too large compared to observations.
Gamma-ray bursts, discovered over three decades ago, can appear to be a hundred times as luminous as the brightest supernovae. However, there has been evidence for some time now of an association of gamma-ray bursts with supernovae of type Ib and Ic. Here we interpret the overabundance of millisecond pulsars in globular clusters and the details of supernova 1987A to reveal the energy source, which powers at least some long-duration gamma-ray bursts, as core-collapse following the merger of two white dwarfs, either as stars or stellar cores. In order for the beams/jets associated with gamma-ray bursts to form in mergers within massive common envelopes (as with SN1987A), much of the intervening stellar material in the polar directions must be cleared out by the time of core-collapse, or the beams/jets themselves must clear their own path. The core-collapse produces supernovae of type Ib, Ic, or II (as with SN1987A, a SNa IIp), leaving a weakly magnetized neutron star remnant with a spin period near 2 milliseconds. There is no compelling reason to invoke any other model for gamma-ray bursts.
High redshift supernovae and Cosmic Microwave Background data are used to constrain the Cardassian expansion model (Freese & Lewis 2002), a cosmology in which a modification to the Friedmann equation gives rise to a flat, matter-dominated Universe which is currently undergoing a phase of accelerated expansion. In particular, the precision of the positions of the Doppler peaks in the CMB angular power spectrum provided by WMAP tightly constrains the cosmology. The available parameter space is further constrained by various high redshift supernova datasets taken from Tonry et al. (2003), a sample of 230 supernovae collated from the literature, in which fits to the distance and extinction have been recomputed where possible and a consistent zero-point has been applied. In addition, the Cardassian model can also be loosely constrained by inferred upper limits on the epoch at which the Cardassian term in the modified Friedmann equation begins to dominate the expansion (z_eq). Using these methods, a Cardassian cosmology is constrained at the 2 sigma level to 0.19<Omega_m<0.26, 0.01<n<0.24 for the Cardassian expansion parameter, n, and 0.42<z_eq<0.89, in contradiction to the previous constraints of Sen & Sen (2003). There is also a large discrepancy between the 1 sigma confidence regions defined by the CMB and tightest supernova constraints, with the CMB data favouring a low-Omega_m, high-n Cardassian cosmology and z_eq>1, as opposed to the supernova data which supports a high-Omega_m, low-n cosmology.
We investigate the required redshift accuracy of type Ia supernova and cluster number-count surveys in order for the redshift uncertainties not to contribute appreciably to the dark energy parameter error budget. For the SNAP supernova experiment, we find that, without the assistance of ground-based measurements, individual supernova redshifts would need to be determined to about 0.002 or better, which is a challenging but feasible requirement for a low-resolution spectrograph. However, we find that accurate redshifts for z<0.1 supernovae, obtained with ground-based experiments, are sufficient to immunize the results against even relatively large redshift errors at high z. For the future cluster number-count surveys such as the South Pole Telescope, Planck or DUET, we find that the purely statistical error in photometric redshift is less important, and that the irreducible, systematic bias in redshift drives the requirements. The redshift bias will have to be kept below 0.001-0.005 per redshift bin (which is determined by the filter set), depending on the sky coverage and details of the definition of the minimal mass of the survey. Furthermore, we find that X-ray surveys have a more stringent required redshift accuracy than Sunyaev-Zeldovich (SZ) effect surveys since they use a shorter lever arm in redshift; conversely, SZ surveys benefit from their high redshift reach only so long as some redshift information is available for distant (z>1) clusters.
The cosmic infrared background (IRB) at wavelengths between 1 micron and 3 microns provides a useful probe of early star-formation prior to and during reionization. To explain the high optical depth to electron scattering, as measured by the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP), one requires significant star-formation activity at redshifts 10 and higher. In addition to massive stars, the IRB flux may be contributed by a population of early miniquasars. We study the relative contributions from first stars, supernovae and quasars to the IRB for reasonable star formation rates at high redshift. If miniquasars radiate efficiently at the Eddington-limit, current background measurements limit the fraction of mass in first stars that is converted to seed black holes to be roughly less than 10%. In the case of supernovae, though an individual supernova is much brighter than the progenitor star, due to the shorter lifetime of order few months, the fractional contribution to the IRB remains at a level of 10% and below when compared to the same contribution from stars. The bright supernovae may, however, be directly detectable by future large ground-based and space telescopes.
To determine the nature of dark energy from observational data, it is important that we use model-independent and optimal methods. We should probe dark energy using its density (allowed to be a free function of cosmic time) instead of its equation of state. We should minimize gravitational lensing effect on supernovae by flux-averaging. We need to include complementary data (for example, from the Cosmic Microwave Background [CMB] and large scale structure [LSS]) in a consistent manner to help break the degeneracy between the dark energy density and the matter density fraction. We should push for ambitious future supernova surveys that can observe a large number of supernovae at the highest possible redshifts. I discuss these and other issues that will be important in our quest to unravel the mystery of the nature of dark energy.   Current supernova, CMB, and LSS data already rule out dark energy models with dark energy densities that vary greatly with time; with the cosmological constant model providing an excellent fit to the data. A precise measurement of dark energy density as a free function of cosmic time will have a fundamental impact on particle physics and cosmology.
We have imaged the nearby galaxy merger Arp 299 at arcsecond and milliarcsecond resolution, using both the Very Large Array and the Very Long Baseline Array. The large-scale radio emission from the merger contains 5 bright, compact radio sources embedded in diffuse emission, with diameters less than 200 pc. Supernova rates of 0.1 to 1 per year are required to produce the VLA-detected radio emission in these sources. Two of the compact VLA radio sources, designated Source A and Source D, also have been detected and imaged at milliarcsecond scales. Source A, which is associated with the nucleus of one of the merging galaxies, contains five milliarcsecond-scale sources, each with a radio power between 100 and 1000 times that of the Galactic supernova remnant Cassiopeia A. Four of these have flat or inverted spectra and appear to be young supernovae. Three of the VLBI-scale sources are located within 10 pc (projected) of one another, and two are separated by less than 3 pc, indicating that they all may be within the same super starcluster or complex of such clusters. The brightest VLBI-scale source, A0, has an extremely inverted pectrum, with alpha larger than +2 at gigahertz frequencies. It seems to be the youngest supernova, which has not yet broken out of its circumstellar shell. The milliarcsecond radio sources within Source A appear to constitute a upernova factory, confirming the presence of an extreme starburst that peaked at least a few million years ago.
The brightness of type Ia supernovae, and their homogeneity as a class, makes them powerful tools in cosmology, yet little is known about the progenitor systems of these explosions. They are thought to arise when a white dwarf accretes matter from a companion star, is compressed and undergoes a thermonuclear explosion Unless the companion star is another white dwarf (in which case it should be destroyed by the mass-transfer process itself), it should survive and show distinguishing properties. Tycho's supernova is one of the only two type Ia supernovae observed in our Galaxy, and so provides an opportunity to address observationally the identification of the surviving companion. Here we report a survey of the central region of its remnant, around the position of the explosion, which excludes red giants as the mass donor of the exploding white dwarf. We found a type G0--G2 star, similar to our Sun in surface temperature and luminosity (but lower surface gravity), moving at more than three times the mean velocity of the stars at that distance, which appears to be the surviving companion of the supernova.
Recent simulations of the formation of the first luminous objects in the universe predict isolated very massive stars to form in dark matter halos with virial temperatures large enough to allow significant amounts of molecular hydrogen to form. We construct a semi-analytic model based on the Press-Schechter formalism and calibrate the minimum halos mass that may form a primordial star with the results from extensive adaptive mesh refinement simulations. The model also includes star formation in objects with virial temperatures in excess of ten thousand Kelvin. The free parameters are tuned to match the optical depth measurements by the WMAP satellite. The models explicitly includes the negative feedback of the destruction of molecular hydrogen by a soft UV background which is computed self-consistently. We predict high redshift supernova rates as one of the most promising tools to test the current scenario of primordial star formation. The supernova rate from primordial stars peaks at redshifts ~20. Using an analytic model for the luminosities of pair-instability supernovae we predict observable magnitudes and discuss possible observational strategies. Such supernovae would release enough metals corresponding to a uniform enrichment to a few hundred thousands of solar metalicity. If some of these stars produce gamma ray bursts our rates will be directly applicable to understanding the anticipated results from the SWIFT satellite. This study highlights the great potential for the James Webb space telescope in probing cosmic structure at redshifts greater than 20.
Helium star--compact object binaries, and helium star--neutron star binaries in particular, are widely believed to be the progenitors of the observed double neutron star systems. In these, the second neutron star is presumed to be the compact remnant of the helium star supernova. Here, the observational implications of such a supernova are discussed, and in particular are explored as a candidate gamma-ray burst mechanism. In this scenario the supernova results in a transient period of rapid accretion onto the compact object, extracting via magnetic torques its rotational energy at highly super-Eddington luminosities in the form of a narrowly beamed, strongly electromagnetically dominated jet. Compton scattering of supernova photons advected within the ejecta, and photons originating at shocks driven into the ejecta by the jet, will cool the jet and can produce the observed prompt emission characteristics, including the peak--inferred isotropic energy relation, X-ray flash characteristics, subpulse light curves, energy dependent time lags and subpulse broadening, and late time spectral softening. The duration of the burst is limited by the rate of Compton cooling of the jet, eventually creating an optically thick, moderately relativistically expanding fireball which can produce the afterglow emission. If the black hole or neutron star stays bound to a compact remnant, late term light curve variability may be observed as in SN 2003dh.
We consider the feasibility of detecting Population III pair-instability supernovae (PISN) at very high redshifts with the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST). Four published estimates for the PISNe rate show a rather wide dispersion, between 50-2200 deg-2 yr-1. Correcting problems with several of these, we conclude that even a fairly optimistic estimate is probably a further order of magnitude lower than this range, at a rate of order 4 deg-2 yr-1 at z \~ 15 and 0.2 deg-2 yr-1 at z ~ 25, both with substantial uncertainty. Although such supernovae would be bright enough to be readily detectable with the JWST at any relevant redshift, the lower number densities derived here will likely require either a dedicated wide-angle search strategy or a serendipitous search. We expect that typically about 1 deg2 (or 500 JWST NIRCam images) per detected supernova at 4.5 mm must be imaged to detect one PISN at z ~ 15 and about 35 deg2 to detect one at z ~ 25. If some Population III star-formation persists to lower redshifts z ~ 5, then PISNe may also be detectable in wide-angle ground-based Z-band imaging surveys at ZAB ~ 23, at a density of order 1 deg-2 of surveyed area. In an Appendix, we consider the possible effects of intergalactic dust in obscuring high redshift supernovae or other high redshift sources. We show that the obscuration at a given rest-wavelength will peak at some maximum redshift and thereafter decline. While it may be a significant effect in observations of the very high redshift Universe, it is unlikely, even under rather pessimistic assumptions, to completely obscure primordial objects.
The remarkable uniformity of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) has allowed astronomers to use them as distance indicators to measure the properties and expansion history of the Universe. However, SNe Ia exhibit intrinsic variation in both their spectra and observed brightness. To reduce these systematic uncertainties, we need a deeper understanding of the observed variations in SNe Ia. Toward this end, the Nearby Supernova Factory (SNfactory) has been designed to discover hundreds of SNe Ia in a systematic and automated fashion and study them in detail.   A prototype run of the SNfactory search pipeline conducted from 2002 to 2003 discovered 83 SNe at a final rate of 12 SNe/month. A large, homogeneous search of this scale offers an excellent opportunity to measure the rate of SNe Ia. This dissertation presents a new method for analyzing the true sensitivity of a multi-epoch supernova search and finds a SN Ia rate from $z\sim0.01$--0.1 of $r_V = 4.26 (+1.39 -1.93) (+0.10 - 0.10)$ SNe Ia/yr/Mpc$^3$ from a preliminary analysis of a subsample of the SNfactory prototype search.   Several unusual supernovae were found in the course of the SNfactory prototype search. One in particular, SN 2002ic, was the first SN Ia to exhibit convincing evidence for a circumstellar medium and offers valuable insight into the progenitors of SNe Ia.
We study the evolution of supernova core from the beginning of gravitational collapse of a 15Msolar star up to 1 second after core bounce. We present results of spherically symmetric simulations of core-collapse supernovae by solving general relativistic neutrino-radiation-hydrodynamics in the implicit time-differencing. We aim to explore the evolution of shock wave in a long term and investigate the formation of protoneutron star together with supernova neutrino signatures. These studies are done to examine the influence of equation of state (EOS) on the postbounce evolution of shock wave in the late phase and the resulting thermal evolution of protoneutron star. We make a comparison of two sets of EOS, that is, by Lattimer and Swesty (LS-EOS) and by Shen et al.(SH-EOS). We found that, for both EOSs, the core does not explode and the shock wave stalls similarly in the first 100 milliseconds after bounce. The revival of shock wave does not occur even after a long period in either cases. However, the recession of shock wave appears different beyond 200 milliseconds after bounce, having different thermal evolution of central core. A more compact protoneutron star is found for LS-EOS than SH-EOS with a difference in the central density by a factor of ~2 and a difference of ~10 MeV in the peak temperature. Resulting spectra of supernova neutrinos are different to the extent that may be detectable by terrestrial neutrino detectors.
We report multifrequency observations with the NRAO Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA) of the compact radio sources J0128+6306 and J0547+2721, which are viewed through the supernova remnants G127.1+0.5 and S147, respectively. Observations were made at frequencies of 1.427, 1.667, 2.271, and 4.987 GHz. The lines of sight to these sources pass through the shock wave and upstream and downstream turbulent layers of their respective supernova remnants, and thus might detect cosmic-ray generated turbulence produced during the Fermi acceleration process. For both sources, we detect interstellar scattering, characterized by a component of the angular size which scales as the square of the observing wavelength. The magnitude of the scattering is characterized by an effective scattering angular size theta_S0 at a frequency of 1 GHz of 13.2 +/- 2.6 milliarcseconds (mas) for J0128+6306 and 6.7 +/- 2.2 mas for J0547+2721. These angular sizes are consistent with the ``incidental'' scattering for any line of sight out of the galaxy at similar galactic latitudes and longitudes. There is therefore no evidence for enhanced turbulence at these supernova remnants. We establish upper limits to the supernova remnant-associated scattering measures of 8.1-14.8 m^-20/3-pc for J0128+6306 and 3.0 m^-20/3-pc for J0547+2721.
We present late-time radio observations of 68 local Type Ibc supernovae, including six events with broad optical absorption lines (``hypernovae''). None of these objects exhibit radio emission attributable to off-axis gamma-ray burst jets spreading into our line-of-sight. Comparison with our afterglow models reveals the following conclusions: (1) Less than $\sim 10%$ of Type Ibc supernovae are associated with typical gamma-ray bursts initially directed away from our line-of-sight; this places an empirical constraint on the GRB beaming factor of $<f_b^{-1}> \lesssim 10^4$ corresponding to an average jet opening angle, $\theta_j \gtrsim 0.8$ degrees. (2) This holds in particular for the broad-lined supernovae (SNe 1997dq, 1997ef, 1998ey, 2002ap, 2002bl and 2003jd) which have been argued to host GRB jets. Our observations reveal no evidence for typical (or even sub-energetic) GRBs and rule out the scenario in which every broad-lined SN harbors a GRB at the 84% confidence level. Their large photospheric velocities and asymmetric ejecta (inferred from spectropolarimetry and nebular spectroscopy) appear to be characteristic of the non-relativistic supernova explosion and do not necessarily imply the existence of associated GRB jets.
To constrain the conditions for very early nucleosynthesis in the Universe we compare the chemical enrichment pattern of an extremely metal-poor damped Lyman alpha (DLA) absorber with predictions from recent explosive nucleosynthesis model calculations. For this, we have analyzed chemical abundances in the DLA system at z_abs=2.6183 toward the quasar Q0913+072 (z_em=2.785) using public UVES/VLT high spectral resolution data. The total neutral hydrogen column density in this absorber is logN(HI)=20.36. Accurate column densities are derived for CII, NI, OI, AlII, SiII, and FeII. Upper limits are given for FeIII and NiII. With [C/H]=-2.83, [N/H]=-3.84, and [O/H]=-2.47, this system represents one of the most metal-poor DLA systems investigated so far. It offers the unique opportunity to measure accurate CNO abundances in a protogalactic structure at high redshift. Given the very low overall abundance level and the observed abundance pattern, the data suggest that the chemical evolution of this DLA system is dominated by one or at most a few stellar generations. With reference to numerical model calculations, the chemical abundances in the DLA system are consistent with an enrichment from a single starburst of a zero-metallicity population of massive stars (10-50 M_sun) exploding as core-collapse Supernovae (SNe), i.e., the classical Type II Supernovae (SNeII), and possibly as hyper-energetic (E>10^51erg) core-collapse Supernovae, so-called Hypernovae (HNe), as well. In contrast, models using non-zero metallicity progenitors or other explosion mechanisms, such as pair-instability Supernovae (PISNe) or Type Ia Supernovae (SNeIa), do not match the observed abundance pattern.
Historical Type Ia supernovae are a leading candidate for the source of positrons observed through their diffuse annihilation emission in the Galaxy. However, search for annihilation emission from individual Type Ia supernovae has not been possible before the improved sensitivity of \integral. The total 511 keV annihilation flux from individual SNe Ia, as well as their contribution to the overall diffuse emission, depends critically on the escape fraction of positrons produced in $^{56}$Co decays. Late optical light curves suggest that this fraction may be as high as 5%. We searched for positron annihilation radiation from the historical Type Ia supernova SN 1006 using the SPI instrument on \integral. We did not detect significant 511 keV line emission, with a 3$\sigma$ flux upper limit of 0.59 x 10$^{-4}$ ergs cm^-2 s^-1 for \wsim 1 Msec exposure time, assuming a FWHM of 2.5 keV. This upper limit corresponds to a 7.5% escape fraction, 50% higher than the expected 5% escape scenario, and rules out the possibility that Type Ia supernovae produce all of the positrons in the Galaxy (~ 12% escape fraction), if the mean positron lifetime is less than 10$^{5}$ years. Future observations with \integral will provide stronger limits on the escape fraction of positrons, the mean positron lifetime, and the contribution of Type Ia supernovae to the overall positron content of the Galaxy.
Observed data is often contaminated by undiscovered interlopers, leading to biased parameter estimation. Here we present BEAMS (Bayesian Estimation Applied to Multiple Species) which significantly improves on the standard maximum likelihood approach in the case where the probability for each data point being `pure' is known. We discuss the application of BEAMS to future Type Ia supernovae (SNIa) surveys, such as LSST, which are projected to deliver over a million supernovae lightcurves without spectra. The multi-band lightcurves for each candidate will provide a probability of being Ia (pure) but the full sample will be significantly contaminated with other types of supernovae and transients. Given a sample of N supernovae with mean probability, P, of being Ia, BEAMS delivers parameter constraints equal to NP spectroscopically-confirmed SNIa. In addition BEAMS can be simultaneously used to tease apart different families of data and to recover properties of the underlying distributions of those families (e.g. the Type Ibc and II distributions). Hence BEAMS provides a unified classification and parameter estimation methodology which may be useful in a diverse range of problems such as photometric redshift estimation or, indeed, any parameter estimation problem where contamination is an issue.
The EGRET results for gamma ray intensities in and near the Galactic Plane have been analysed in some detail. Attention has been concentrated on energies above 1 GeV and the individual intensities in a $4^{\circ}$ longitude bin have been determined and compared with the large scale mean found from a nine-degree polynomial fit. Comparison has been made of the observed standard deviation for the ratio of these intensities with that expected from variants of our model. The basic model adopts cosmic ray origin from supernova remnants, the particles then diffusing through the Galaxy with our usual `anomalous diffusion'. The variants involve the clustering of SN, a frequency distribution for supernova explosion energies, and 'normal', rather than 'anomalous' diffusion.   It is found that for supernovae of unique energy, and our usual anomalous diffusion, clustering is necessary, particularly in the Inner Galaxy. An alternative, and preferred, situation is to adopt the model with a frequency distribution of supernova energies. The results for the Outer Galaxy are such that no clustering is required.   If their explosion energies are distributed then supernovae can be the origin of UHECR.
We develop and demonstrate the methodology of testing multi-dimensional supernova models against observations by studying the properties of one example of the detonation from failed deflagration (DFD) explosion model of thermonuclear supernovae. Using time-dependent multi-dimensional radiative transfer calculations, we generate the synthetic broadband optical light curves, near-infrared light curves, color evolution curves, full spectral time-series, and spectropolarization of the model, as seen from various viewing angles. All model observables are critically evaluated against examples of well-observed, standard Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). We explore the consequences of the intrinsic model asphericity by studying the dependence of the model emission on viewing angle, and by quantifying the resulting dispersion in (and internal correlations between) various model observables. These statistical properties of the model are also evaluated against those of the available observational sample of SNe Ia. On the whole, the DFD model shows good agreement with a broad range of SN Ia observations. Certain deficiencies are also apparent, and point to further developments within the basic theoretical framework. We also identify several intriguing orientation effects in the model which suggest ways in which the asphericity of SNe Ia may contribute to their photometric and spectroscopic diversity and, conversely, how the relative homogeneity of SNe Ia constrains the degree of asymmetry allowable in the models. The comprehensive methodology adopted in this work proves an essential component of developing and validating theoretical supernova models, and helps motivate and clearly define future directions in both the modeling and the observation of SNe Ia.
Supernovae of type IIn possess spectral signatures that indicate an intense interaction between the supernova ejecta and surrounding dense circumstellar material cast off by the star in pre-explosion mass-loss episodes. Studying this interaction can yield clues to the nature of Type IIn progenitors and their mass loss history. In particular, polarization spectra of Type IIn's show complex line polarization and position angle features that arise from a combination of geometrical and optical effects. I have constructed a Monte Carlo code that simulates the transfer of the H alpha line through circumstellar shells with various geometrical configurations and optical characteristics. The superposition of broad and narrow line components produced in different regions of the circumstellar environment and modified by electron and line scattering, hydrogen absorption, thermal emission, and geometrical and viewing angle effects gives rise to a variety of polarized line shapes in the model spectra. Comparison of these results with recent high-quality spectropolarimetric observations of Type IIn supernovae suggests that a model "shock" region between the supernova photosphere and the circumstellar shell is necessary to produce the narrow polarized emission features at the rest wavelength of H alpha seen in some IIn's. Further model results point toward other features in the polarized line profile that can be used to constrain the characteristics of the circumstellar material in these intriguing objects. The code's usefulness will be extended by the treatment of Doppler effects due to expansion of the circumstellar scattering region, such as those that characterize the polarized H alpha profiles of the Type IIn SN 1997eg.
In February 2006, Swift caught a GRB in the act of turning into a supernova, and made the first ever direct observations of the break-out and early expansion of a supernova shock wave. GRB 060218 began with an exceptionally long burst of non-thermal gamma-rays, lasting over 2000 s, as a jet erupted through the surface of the star. While this was in progress, an optically-thick thermal component from the shock wave of the supernova explosion grew to prominence, and we were able to track the mildly relativistic expansion of this shell as the blackbody peak moved from the X-rays into the UV and optical bands. The initial radius of the shock implied that it was a blue supergiant which had exploded, but the lack of Hydrogen emission lines in the supernova spectrum indicated a more compact star. The most likely scenario is that the shock ploughed into the massive stellar wind of a Wolf-Rayet progenitor, with the shock breaking out and becoming visible to us once it reached the radius where the wind became optically-thin. I present the Swift observations of this landmark event, and discuss the new questions and answers it leaves us with.
SN 1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud is close enough for a study of the very late time evolution of a supernova and its transition to a supernova remnant. Nearly two decades after explosion we are witnessing the supernova shock wave engaging the inner circumstellar ring, which had been fluorescing since being ionised by the soft X-ray flash from shock breakout. We follow the interaction of the supernova shock with the ring material. The spatially resolved information provides us with insight into the individual shock regions around the ring. Near-infrared integral field spectroscopy observations with SINFONI/VLT of the SN-ring interaction is presented. SINFONI's adaptive optics supported integral field spectrograph spatially resolves the ring and the data thus we obtain a better spatial understanding of the spectrum in different regions of the object. With a dynamical map of the interacting ring we determine parameters for its geometry. Since most of the IR emission lines originate behind the shock front we obtain an indication of the radial velocity of the shocked material after deconvolving the geometry. The ring geometry is consistent with a circle and we also derive a new, independent measurement of the systemic ring, and presumably also supernova, velocity. We find from the spatial distributions of the flux in the different emission lines the degree of cooling in the shocked material and follows the increases observed in the radio and X-rays. Emission from the ejecta is detected only in the strongest [Fe II] lines.
The $\nu_\mu$ and $\nu_\tau$ neutrinos (and their antiparticles) from a Galactic core-collapse supernova can be observed in a water-\v{C}erenkov detector by the neutral-current excitation of $^{16}$O. The number of events expected is several times greater than from neutral-current scattering on electrons. The observation of this signal would be a strong test that these neutrinos are produced in core-collapse supernovae, and with the right characteristics. In this paper, this signal is used as the basis for a technique of neutrino mass determination from a future Galactic supernova. The masses of the $\nu_\mu$ and $\nu_\tau$ neutrinos can either be measured or limited by their delay relative to the $\bar{\nu}_e$ neutrinos. By comparing to the high-statistics $\bar{\nu}_e$ data instead of the theoretical expectation, much of the model dependence is canceled. Numerical results are presented for a future supernova at 10 kpc as seen in the SuperKamiokande detector. Under reasonable assumptions, and in the presence of the expected counting statistics, $\nu_\mu$ and $\nu_\tau$ masses down to about 50 eV can be simply and robustly determined. The signal used here is more sensitive to small neutrino masses than the signal based on neutrino-electron scattering.
We perform a detailed study of the Earth matter effects on supernova neutrinos with neutrino oscillation parameter LMA and small $\theta_{13}$. The Earth effects show significant dependences on the neutrino path length inside the Earth and the value of $\Delta m^{2}_{12}$. We investigate rather optimistically a possibility that we can probe the value of $\Delta m^{2}_{12}$ by the Earth effects. We assume that $\theta_{12}$ and the direction of the supernova are known with enough accuracy and that the resonance that occurs at higher density in supernova envelope is completely nonadiabatic. Further the neutrino spectra before neutrinos go through the Earth are assumed to be known. Then we show that making use of these dependences, we can obtain implication for the value of $\Delta m^{2}_{12}$ by comparing the observed energy spectrum to the predicted one. When SK detects neutrinos from supernova at 10kpc which traveled through the Earth (nadir angle $<$ 80 degree), $\Delta m^{2}_{12}$ can be determined with an accuracy of $\sim 10%$. In much of the neutrino-detection-time-$\Delta m^{2}_{12}$ plane, $\Delta m^{2}_{12}$ might be determined with an accuracy equal to or better than $\pm 0.5 \times 10^{-5} {\rm eV}^{2}$.
Several extensions of the standard electroweak model allow new four-fermion interactions (nu_a nu_b * ff) with strength eps_ab*G_F, where (a,b) are flavor indices. We revisit their effects on flavor oscillations of massive (anti)neutrinos in supernovae, in order to achieve, in the region above the protoneutron star, an analytical treatment valid for generic values of the neutrino mixing angles (omega,phi,psi)=(theta_12,theta_13,theta_23). Assuming that eps_ab<<1, we find that the leading effects on the flavor transitions occurring at high (H) and low (L) density along the supernova matter profile can be simply embedded through the replacements phi-->phi+eps_H and omega-->omega+eps_L, respectively, where eps_H and eps_L are specific linear combinations of the eps_ab's. Similar replacements hold for eventual oscillations in the Earth matter. From a phenomenological point of view, the most relevant consequence is a possible uncontrolled bias (phi-->phi+eps_H) in the value of the mixing angle phi inferred by inversion of supernova neutrino data. Such a drawback, however, does not preclude the discrimination of the neutrino mass spectrum hierarchy (direct or inverse) through supernova neutrino oscillations.
We propose that supernova relic neutrino (SRN) observation can be used to set constraints on the neutrino decay models. Because of the long distance scale from cosmological supernovae to the Earth, SRN have possibility to provide much stronger limit than the present one obtained from solar neutrino observation. Since the currently available data are only the upper limit on the flux integrated over $E_{\bar\nu_e}>19.3$ MeV, the decay models on which we can set constraints is quite restricted; they must satisfy specific conditions such that the daughter neutrinos are active species, the neutrino mass spectrum is quasi-degenerate, and the neutrino mass hierarchy is normal. Our numerical calculation clearly indicates that the neutrino decay model with $(\tau_2/m,\tau_3/m)\alt (10^{10},10^{10})$ [s/eV], where $\tau_i$ represents the lifetime of mass eigenstates $\bar\nu_i$, appears to give the SRN flux that is larger than the current upper limit. However, since the theoretical SRN prediction contains many uncertainties concerning a supernova rate in the universe or simulation of supernova explosions, we cannot conclude that there exists the excluded parameter region of the neutrino lifetime. In the near future, further reduced upper limit is actually expected, and it will provide more severe constraints on the neutrino decay models.
We present multi-epoch spectral and spectropolarimetric observations of the Type IIn supernova (SN) 1997eg that indicate the presence of a flattened disk-like concentration of circumstellar material surrounding nonspherical ejecta, with which the disk is misaligned. The polarization across the broad H alpha, H beta, and He I 5876 lines of SN 1997eg forms closed loops when viewed in the Stokes q-u plane. Such loops occur when the geometrical symmetry of one or both of the Stokes parameters across spectral lines is broken, in this case most likely by occultation of the ejecta by the equatorial circumstellar matter concentration. The polarization of the narrow Balmer lines possesses an intrinsic axis that differs by 12 degrees from that of the elongated ejecta and probably indicates the orientation of the disk-like circumstellar material. The existence of two different axes of symmetry in SN 1997eg suggests that neither rotation of the progenitor nor the influence of a companion star can be the sole mechanism creating a preferred axis within the supernova system. Our model supports the emerging hypothesis that the progenitors of some Type IIn supernovae are luminous blue variable stars, whose pre-supernova mass eruptions form the circumstellar shells that physically characterize the SN IIn subclass. These conclusions, which are independent of interstellar polarization effects, would have been unobservable with only a single epoch of spectropolarimetry.
The origin of low-luminosity Type IIP supernovae is unclear: they have been proposed to originate either from massive (about 25 Msun) or low-mass (about 9 Msun) stars. We wish to determine parameters of the low-luminosity Type IIP supernova 2003Z, to estimate a mass-loss rate of the presupernova, and to recover a progenitor mass. We compute the hydrodynamic models of the supernova to describe the light curves and the observed expansion velocities. The wind density of the presupernova is estimated using a thin shell model for the interaction with circumstellar matter. We estimate an ejecta mass of 14 Msun, an explosion energy of 2.45x10^50 erg, a presupernova radius of 229 Rsun, and a radioactive Ni-56 amount of 0.0063 Msun. The upper limit of the wind density parameter in the presupernova vicinity is 10^13 g/cm, and the mass lost at the red/yellow supergiant stage is less than 0.6 Msun assuming the constant mass-loss rate. The estimated progenitor mass is in the range of 14.4-17.4 Msun. The presupernova of SN 2003Z was probably a yellow supergiant at the time of the explosion. The progenitor mass of SN 2003Z is lower than those of SN 1987A and SN 1999em, normal Type IIP supernovae, but higher than the lower limit of stars undergoing a core collapse. We propose an observational test based on the circumstellar interaction to discriminate between the massive (about 25 Msun) and moderate-mass (about 16 Msun) scenarios.
The model-independent method of using type Ia supernovae proposed and developed by Daly and Djorgovski (2003, 2004) has been applied to the Riess et al. (2007) supernovae sample. Assuming only a Robertson-Walker metric, we find that the universe is accelerating today. This result is purely kinematic, is independent of the contents of the universe, and does not require that a theory of gravity be specified. Our model-independent method allows a determination of q(z) for a particular value of space curvature. When q(z) transitions from negative to positive values, the universe transitions from an accelerating to a decelerating state. For zero space curvature, we find that the universe transitions from acceleration to deceleration at a zedshift of about = 0.35 for the Riess et al. (2007) sample. If a theory of gravity is specified, the supernovae data can be used to determine the pressure, energy density, and equation of state of the dark energy, and the potential and kinetic energy density of a dark energy scalar field as functions of redshift. The relevant equations from General Relativity are applied, and these functions are obtained. The results are consistent with predictions in the standard Lambda Cold Dark Matter model at about the two sigma level.
Extragalactic transient searches have historically been limited to looking for the appearance of new sources such as supernovae. It is now possible to carry out a new kind of survey that will do the opposite, that is, search for the disappearance of massive stars. This will entail the systematic observation of galaxies within a distance of 10 Mpc in order to watch ~10^6 supergiants. Reaching this critical number ensures that something will occur yearly, since these massive stars must end their lives with a core collapse within ~10^6 years. Using deep imaging and image subtraction it is possible to determine the fates of these stars whether they end with a bang (supernova) or a whimper (fall out of sight). Such a survey would place completely new limits on the total rate of all core collapses, which is critical for determining the validity of supernova models. It would also determine the properties of supernova progenitors, better characterize poorly understood optical transients, such as eta Carina-like mass ejections, find and characterize large numbers of Cepheids, luminous blue variables and eclipsing binaries, and allow the discovery of any new phenomena that inhabit this relatively unexplored parameter space.
We present new Chandra X-ray observations and detailed astrometry of the field of the type Ia supernova 2007on, for which the detection of a likely progenitor in archival Chandra data was recently reported.   No source is detected in the new Chandra images, taken six weeks after optical maximum. We calculate a 90-99% probability that any X-ray source near the position of the supernova (SN) is fainter than in the pre-outburst images, depending on the choice of aperture, which supports the identification of the archival X-ray source with the SN.   Detailed astrometry of the X-ray and new optical images, however, gives an offset between the supernova and the measured X-ray source position of 1.15+/-0.27". Extensive simulations show that the probability of finding an offset of this magnitude is ~1%, equal to the (trial-corrected) probability of a chance alignment with any X-ray source in the field. This casts doubt on the identification of the X-ray source with the progenitor, although the scenario in which at least some of the observed X-rays are connected to the supernova may be the least unlikely based on all available data.   After a brief review of the auxiliary evidence, we conclude that only future X-ray observations can shed further light on the proposed connection between the X-ray source and the progenitor of SN 2007on, and thus whether an accreting white dwarf scenario is truly favoured for this SN Ia.
Our 50 ks Chandra observation of the small radio supernova remnant (SNR) G1.9+0.3 shows a complete shell structure with strong bilateral symmetry, about $100''$ in diameter. The radio morphology is also shell-like, but only about $84''$ in diameter, based on observations made in 1985. We attribute the size difference to expansion between 1985 and our Chandra observations of 2007. Expansion is confirmed in comparing radio images from 1985 and 2008. We deduce that G1.9+0.3 is of order 100 years old -- the youngest supernova remnant in the Galaxy. Based on a very high absorbing column density of $5.5 \times 10^{22}$ cm$^{-2}$, we place G1.9+0.3 near the Galactic Center, at a distance of about 8.5 kpc, where the mean remnant radius would be about 2 pc, and the required expansion speed about $14,000$ km s$^{-1}$. The X-ray spectrum is featureless and well-described by the exponentially cut off synchrotron model {\tt srcut}. With the radio flux at 1 GHz fixed at 0.9 Jy, we find a spectral index of 0.65 and a rolloff frequency of $1.4 \times 10^{18}$ Hz. The implied characteristic rolloff electron energy of about $94 (B/10 \mu{\rm G})^{-1/2}$ TeV is the highest ever reported for a shell supernova remnant. It can easily be reached by standard diffusive shock acceleration, given the very high shock velocities; it can be well described by either age-limited or synchrotron-loss-limited acceleration. Not only is G1.9+0.3 the youngest known Galactic remnant, it is also only the fourth Galactic X-ray synchrotron-dominated shell supernova remnant.
To investigate the effect of gravitational lensing of supernovae in large ongoing surveys, we simulate the effect of gravitational lensing magnification on individual supernovae using observational data input from two large supernova surveys. To estimate the magnification due to matter in the foreground, we simulate galaxy catalogs and compute the magnification along individual lines of sight using the multiple lens plane algorithm. The dark matter haloes of the galaxies are modelled as gravitational lenses using singular isothermal sphere or Navarro-Frenk-White profiles. Scaling laws between luminosity and mass, provided by Faber-Jackson and Tully-Fisher relations, are used to estimate the masses of the haloes.   While our simulations show that the SDSSII supernova survey is marginally affected by gravitational lensing, we find that the effect will be measurable in the SNLS survey that probes higher redshifts. Our simulations show that the probability to measure a significant (3 sigma) correlation between the Hubble diagram residuals and the calculated lensing magnification is ~95% in the SNLS data. Moreover, with this data it should be possible to constrain the normalisation of the masses of the lensing galaxy haloes at the 1 sigma and 2 sigma confidence level with ~30% and ~60% accuracy, respectively.
In this paper, we first calculate the realistic Earth matter effects in the detection of type II supernova neutrinos at the Daya Bay reactor neutrino experiment which is currently under construction. It is found that the Earth matter effects depend on the neutrino incident angle $\theta$, the neutrino mass hierarchy $\Delta m_{31}^{2}$, the crossing probability at the high resonance region inside the supernova, $P_{H}$, the neutrino temperature, $T_{\alpha}$, and the pinching parameter in the neutrino spectrum, $\eta_{\alpha}$. We also take into account the collective effects due to neutrino-neutrino interactions inside the supernova. With the expression for the dependence of $P_H$ on the neutrino mixing angle $\theta_{13}$, we obtain the relations between $\theta_{13}$ and the event numbers for various reaction channels of supernova neutrinos. Using these relations, we propose a possible method to acquire information about $\theta_{13}$ smaller than $1.5^\circ$. Such a sensitivity cannot yet be achieved by the Daya Bay reactor neutrino experiment which has a sensitivity of the order of $\theta_{13}\sim 3^\circ$. Furthermore, we apply this method to other neutrino experiments, i.e. Super-K, SNO, KamLAND, LVD, MinBooNE, Borexino, and Double-Chooz. We also study the energy spectra of the differential event numbers, ${\rm d}N/{\rm d}E$.
The nature of Type Ia supernova progenitors is still unclear. The outstanding characteristic of the single-degenerate scenario is that it contains hydrogen in the binary companion of the exploding white dwarf star, which, if mixed into the ejecta of the supernova in large amounts may lead to conflicts with the observations thus ruling out the scenario. We investigate the effect of the impact of Type Ia supernova ejecta on a main sequence companion star of the progenitor system. With a series of simulations we investigate how different parameters of this system affect the amount of hydrogen stripped from the companion by the impact. The stellar evolution code GARSTEC is used to set up the structure of the companion stars mimicking the effect of a binary evolution phase. The impact itself is simulated with the smoothed particle hydrodynamics code GADGET2. We reproduce and confirm the results of earlier grid-based hydrodynamical simulation. Parameter studies of the progenitor system are extended to include the results of recent binary evolution studies. The more compact structure of the companion star found here significantly reduces the stripped hydrogen mass. The low hydrogen masses resulting from a more realistic companion structure are consistent with current observational constraints. Therefore, the single-degenerate scenario remains a valid possibility for Type Ia supernova progenitors. These new results are not a numerical effect, but the outcome of different initial conditions.
Significant progress has been made in the development of an international network of gravitational wave detectors, such as TAMA300, LIGO, VIRGO, and GEO600. For these detectors, one of the most promising sources of gravitational waves are core collapse supernovae especially in our Galaxy. Recent simulations of core collapse supernovae, rigorously carried out by various groups, show that the features of the waveforms are determined by the rotational profiles of the core, such as the rotation rate and the degree of the differential rotation prior to core-collapse. Specifically, it has been predicted that the sign of the second largest peak in the gravitational wave strain signal is negative if the core rotates cylindrically with strong differential rotation. The sign of the second peak could be a nice indicator that provides us with information about the angular momentum distribution of the core, unseen without gravitational wave signals. Here we present a data analysis procedure aiming at the detection of the second peak using a coherent network analysis and estimate the detection efficiency when a supernova is at the sky location of the Galactic center. The simulations showed we were able to determine the sign of the second peak under an idealized condition of a network of gravitational wave detectors if a supernova occurs at the Galactic center.
We present observational constraints on the nature of the different core-collapse supernova types through an investigation of the association of their explosion sites with recent star formation, as traced by H-alpha +[NII] line emission. We discuss results on the analysed data of the positions of 168 core-collapse supernovae with respect to the H-alpha emission within their host galaxies. From our analysis we find that overall the type II progenitor population does not trace the underlying star formation. Our results are consistent with a significant fraction of SNII arising from progenitor stars of less than 10 solar masses. We find that the supernovae of type Ib show a higher degree of association with HII regions than those of type II (without accurately tracing the emission), while the type Ic population accurately traces the H-alpha emission. This implies that the main core-collapse supernova types form a sequence of increasing progenitor mass, from the type II, to Ib and finally Ic. We find that the type IIn sub-class display a similar degree of association with the line emission to the overall SNII population, implying that at least the majority of these SNe do not arise from the most massive stars. We also find that the small number of SN `impostors' within our sample do not trace the star formation of their host galaxies, a result that would not be expected if these events arise from massive Luminous Blue Variable star progenitors.
We review the ensemble of anticipated gravitational-wave (GW) emission processes in stellar core collapse and postbounce core-collapse supernova evolution. We discuss recent progress in the modeling of these processes and summarize most recent GW signal estimates. In addition, we present new results on the GW emission from postbounce convective overturn and protoneutron star g-mode pulsations based on axisymmetric radiation-hydrodynamic calculations. Galactic core-collapse supernovae are very rare events, but within 3-5 Mpc from Earth, the rate jumps to 1 in ~2 years. Using the set of currently available theoretical gravitational waveforms, we compute upper-limit optimal signal-to-noise ratios based on current and advanced LIGO/GEO600/VIRGO noise curves for the recent SN 2008bk which exploded at ~3.9 Mpc. While initial LIGOs cannot detect GWs emitted by core-collapse events at such a distance, we find that advanced LIGO-class detectors could put significant upper limits on the GW emission strength for such events. We study the potential occurrence of the various GW emission processes in particular supernova explosion scenarios and argue that the GW signatures of neutrino-driven, magneto-rotational, and acoustically-driven core-collapse SNe may be mutually exclusive. We suggest that even initial LIGOs could distinguish these explosion mechanisms based on the detection (or non-detection) of GWs from a galactic core-collapse supernova.
We examine nucleosynthesis in the electron capture supernovae of progenitor AGB stars with an O-Ne-Mg core (with the initial stellar mass of 8.8 M_\odot). Thermodynamic trajectories for the first 810 ms after core bounce are taken from a recent state-of-the-art hydrodynamic simulation. The presented nucleosynthesis results are characterized by a number of distinct features that are not shared with those of other supernovae from the collapse of stars with iron core (with initial stellar masses of more than 10 M_\odot). First is the small amount of 56Ni (= 0.002-0.004 M_\odot) in the ejecta, which can be an explanation for observed properties of faint supernovae such as SNe 2008S and 1997D. In addition, the large Ni/Fe ratio is in reasonable agreement with the spectroscopic result of the Crab nebula (the relic of SN 1054). Second is the large production of 64Zn, 70Ge, light p-nuclei (74Se, 78Kr, 84Sr, and 92Mo), and in particular, 90Zr, which originates from the low Y_e (= 0.46-0.49, the number of electrons per nucleon) ejecta. We find, however, that only a 1-2% increase of the minimum Y_e moderates the overproduction of 90Zr. In contrast, the production of 64Zn is fairly robust against a small variation of Y_e. This provides the upper limit of the occurrence of this type of events to be about 30% of all core-collapse supernovae.
We review the final stages of stellar evolution, supernova properties, and chemical yields as a function of the progenitor's mass M. (1) 8 - 10 Ms stars are super-AGB stars when the O+Ne+Mg core collapses due to electron capture. These AGB-supernovae may constitute an SN 2008S-like sub-class of Type IIn supernovae. These stars produce little alpha-elements and Fe-peak elements, but are important sources of Zn and light p-nuclei. (2) 10 - 90 Ms stars undergo Fe-core collapse. Nucleosynthesis in aspherical explosions is important, as it can well reproduce the abundance patterns observed in extremely metal-poor stars. (3) 90 - 140 Ms stars undergo pulsational nuclear instabilities at various nuclear burning stages, including O and Si-burning. (4) 140 - 300 Ms stars become pair-instability supernovae, if the mass loss is small enough. (5) Stars more massive than 300 Ms undergo core-collapse to form intermediate mass black holes.
The unusual helium-rich (type Ib) supernova SN 2005E is distinguished from any supernova hitherto observed by its faint and rapidly fading light curve, prominent calcium lines in late-phase spectra and lack of any mark of recent star formation near the supernova location. These properties are claimed to be explained by a helium detonation in a thin surface layer of an accreting white dwarf (Perets et al. 2010). Here we report on observations of SN 2005cz appeared in an elliptical galaxy, whose observed properties resemble those of SN 2005E in that it is helium-rich and unusually faint, fades rapidly, shows much weaker oxygen emission lines than those of calcium in the well-evolved spectrum. We argue that these properties are best explained by a core-collapse supernova at the low-mass end ($8-12 M_{\odot}$) of the range of massive stars that explode (Smartt 2009). Such a low mass progenitor had lost its hydrogen-rich envelope through binary interaction, having very thin oxygen-rich and silicon-rich layers above the collapsing core, thus ejecting a very small amount of radioactive $^{56}$Ni and oxygen. Although the host galaxy NGC 4589 is an elliptical, some studies have revealed evidence of recent star-formation activity (Zhang et al. 2008), consistent with the core-collapse scenario.
We investigate neutrino oscillations from core-collapse supernovae that produce magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) explosions. By calculating numerically the flavor conversion of neutrinos in the highly non-spherical envelope, we study how the explosion anisotropy has impacts on the emergent neutrino spectra through the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein effect. In the case of the inverted mass hierarchy with a relatively large theta_(13), we show that survival probabilities of electron type neutrinos and antineutrinos seen from the rotational axis of the MHD supernovae (i.e., polar direction), can be significantly different from those along the equatorial direction. The event numbers of electron type antineutrinos observed from the polar direction are predicted to show steepest decrease, reflecting the passage of the magneto-driven shock to the so-called high-resonance regions. Furthermore we point out that such a shock effect, depending on the original neutrino spectra, appears also for the low-resonance regions, which leads to a noticeable decrease in the electron type neutrino signals. This reflects a unique nature of the magnetic explosion featuring a very early shock-arrival to the resonance regions, which is in sharp contrast to the neutrino-driven delayed supernova models. Our results suggest that the two features in the electron type antineutrinos and neutrinos signals, if visible to the Super-Kamiokande for a Galactic supernova, could mark an observational signature of the magnetically driven explosions, presumably linked to the formation of magnetars and/or long-duration gamma-ray bursts.
Energy release from radioactive decays contributes significantly to supernova light curves. Previous works, which considered the energy deposited by gamma-rays and positrons produced by 56Ni, 56Co, 57Ni, 57Co, 44Ti and 44Sc, have been quite successful in explaining the light curves of both core collapse and thermonuclear supernovae. We point out that Auger and internal conversion electrons together with the associated X-ray cascade, constitute an additional heat source. When a supernova is transparent to gamma-rays, these electrons can contribute significantly to light curves for reasonable nucleosynthetic yields. In particular, the electrons emitted in the decay of 57Co, which are largely due to internal conversion from a fortuitously low-lying 3/2- state in the daughter 57Fe, constitute an additional significant energy deposition channel. We show that when the heating by these electrons is accounted for, a slow-down in the lightcurve of SN 1998bw is naturally obtained for typical hypernova nucleosynthetic yields. Additionally, we show that for generic Type Ia supernova yields, the Auger electrons emitted in the ground-state to ground-state electron capture decay of 55Fe exceed the energy released by the 44Ti decay chain for many years after the explosion.
We report on the discovery and initial observations of the energetic type IIn supernova (SN), 2008fz. The optical energy emitted by SN 2008fz (based on the light curve over a 88 day period), is possibly the most ever observed for a supernova (1.4 x 10^51 erg). The event was more luminous than the type IIn SN 2006gy, but exhibited same smooth, slowly evolving light curve. As is characteristic of type IIn SN, the early spectra of 2008fz initially exhibited narrow Balmer lines which were replaced by a broader component at later times. The spectra also show a blue continuum with no signs of Ca or Na absorption, suggesting that there is little extinction due to intragalatic dust in the host or circumstellar material. No host galaxy is identified in prior coadded images reaching R ~ 22. From the supernova's redshift, z=0.133, we place an upper limit on the host of M_R=-17. The presence of the SN within such a faint host follows the majority of recently discovered highly luminous SN. A possible reason for this occurrence is the very high star formation rate occurring in low-mass galaxies in combination with the low metallicity environment, which makes the production of very massive stars possible. We determine the peak absolute magnitude of the event to be M_V = -22.3 from the initial photometry and the redshift distance, placing it among the most luminous supernovae discovered.
We present the results of near-infrared spectroscopic observations of dense ($\simgt$ 10$^3$ cm$^{-3}$) iron ejecta in the young core-collapse supernova remnant G11.2-0.3. Five ejecta knots projected to be close to its center show a large dispersion in their Doppler shifts: two knots in the east are blueshifted by more than 1,000 \kms, while three western knots have relatively small blueshifts of 20-60 \kms. This velocity discrepancy may indicate that the western knots have been significantly decelerated or that there exists a systematic velocity difference among the knots. One ejecta filament in the northwestern boundary, on the other hand, is redshifted by $\simgt$ 200 \kms, while opposite filament in the southeastern boundary shows a negligible radial motion. Some of the knots and filaments have secondary velocity components, and one knot shows a bow shock-like feature in the velocity structure. The iron ejecta appear to be devoid of strong emission from other heavy elements, such as S, which may attest to the alpha-rich freezeout process in the explosive nucleosynthesis of the core-collapse supernova explosion close to its center. The prominent bipolar distribution of the Fe ejecta in the northwestern and southeastern direction, along with the elongation of the central pulsar wind nebula in the perpendicular direction, is consistent with the interpretation that the supernova exploded primarily along the northwestern and southeastern direction.
Modern supernova (SN) surveys are now uncovering stellar explosions at rates that far surpass what the world's spectroscopic resources can handle. In order to make full use of these SN datasets, it is necessary to use analysis methods that depend only on the survey photometry. This paper presents two methods for utilizing a set of SN light curve templates to classify SN objects. In the first case we present an updated version of the Bayesian Adaptive Template Matching program (BATM). To address some shortcomings of that strictly Bayesian approach, we introduce a method for Supernova Ontology with Fuzzy Templates (SOFT), which utilizes Fuzzy Set Theory for the definition and combination of SN light curve models. For well-sampled light curves with a modest signal to noise ratio (S/N>10), the SOFT method can correctly separate thermonuclear (Type Ia) SNe from core collapse SNe with 98% accuracy. In addition, the SOFT method has the potential to classify supernovae into sub-types, providing photometric identification of very rare or peculiar explosions. The accuracy and precision of the SOFT method is verified using Monte Carlo simulations as well as real SN light curves from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and the SuperNova Legacy Survey. In a subsequent paper the SOFT method is extended to address the problem of parameter estimation, providing estimates of redshift, distance, and host galaxy extinction without any spectroscopy.
A statistical model for the equation of state (EOS) and the composition of supernova matter is presented with focus on the liquid-gas phase transition of nuclear matter. It consists of an ensemble of nuclei and interacting nucleons in nuclear statistical equilibrium. A relativistic mean field model is applied for the nucleons. The masses of the nuclei are taken from nuclear structure calculations which are based on the same nuclear Lagrangian. For known nuclei experimental data is used directly. Excluded volume effects are implemented in a thermodynamic consistent way so that the transition to uniform nuclear matter at large densities can be described. Thus the model can be applied at all densities relevant for supernova simulations, i.e. rho=10^5 - 10^15 g/cm^3, and it is possible to calculate a complete supernova EOS table. The model allows to investigate the role of shell effects, which lead to narrow-peaked distributions around the neutron magic numbers for low temperatures. At larger temperatures the distributions become broad. The significance of the statistical treatment and the nuclear distributions for the composition is shown. We find that the contribution of light clusters is very important and is only poorly represented by alpha-particles alone. The results for the EOS are systematically compared to two commonly used models for supernova matter which are based on the single nucleus approximation. Apart from the composition, in general only small differences of the different EOSs are found. The differences are most pronounced around the (low-density) liquid-gas phase transition line where the distribution of light and intermediate clusters has an important effect. Possible extensions and improvements of the model are discussed.
Type II-plateau supernovae (SNe IIP) are the results of the explosions of red supergiants and are the most common subclass of core-collapse supernovae. Past observations have shown that the outer layers of the ejecta of SNe IIP are largely spherical, but the degree of asphericity increases toward the core. We present evidence for high degrees of asphericity in the inner cores of three recent SNe IIP (SNe 2006my, 2006ov, and 2007aa), as revealed by late-time optical spectropolarimetry. The three objects were all selected to have very low interstellar polarization (ISP), which minimizes the uncertainties in ISP removal and allows us to use the continuum polarization as a tracer of asphericity. The three objects have intrinsic continuum polarizations in the range of 0.83-1.56% in observations taken after the end of the photometric plateau, with the polarization dropping to almost zero at the wavelengths of strong emission lines. Our observations of SN 2007aa at earlier times, taken on the photometric plateau, show contrastingly smaller continuum polarizations (~0.1%). The late-time H-alpha and [O I] line profiles of SN 2006ov provide further evidence for asphericities in the inner ejecta. Such high core polarizations in very ordinary core-collapse supernovae provide further evidence that essentially all core-collapse supernova explosions are highly aspherical, even if the outer parts of the ejecta show only small deviations from spherical symmetry.
Unraveling the mechanism for core-collapse supernova explosions is an outstanding computational challenge and the problem remains essentially unsolved despite more than four decades of effort. However, much progress in realistic modeling has occurred recently through the availability of multi-teraflop machines and the increasing sophistication of supernova codes. These improvements have led to some key insights which may clarify the picture in the not too distant future. Here we briefly review the current status of the three explosion mechanisms (acoustic, MHD, and neutrino heating) that are currently under active investigation, concentrating on the neutrino heating mechanism as the one most likely responsible for producing explosions from progenitors in the mass range ~10 to ~25 solar masses. We then briefly describe the CHIMERA code, a supernova code we have developed to simulate core-collapse supernovae in 1, 2, and 3 spatial dimensions. We finally describe the results of an ongoing suite of 2D simulations initiated from a 12, 15, 20, and 25 solar mass progenitor. These have all exhibited explosions and are currently in the expanding phase with the shock at between 5,000 and 10,000 km. We finally very briefly describe an ongoing simulation in 3 spatial dimensions initiated from the 15 solar mass progenitor.
We investigate the contribution of different formation scenarios for type Ia supernovae in elliptical galaxies. The single degenerate scenario (a white dwarf accreting from a late main sequence or red giant companion) is tested against the double degenerate scenario (the spiral-in and merging of two white dwarfs through the emission of gravitational wave radiation). We use a population number synthesis code incorporating the latest physical results in binary evolution, and allowing to differentiate between certain physical scenarios (e.g. description of common envelope evolution) and evolutionary parameters (e.g. mass transfer efficiency during Roche lobe overflow). The obtained theoretical distributions of the delay times of type Ia supernovae are compared to those which are observed, both in morphological shape and absolute number of events. The critical dependency of these distributions on certain parameters is used to constrain the values of the latter. We find that the single degenerate scenario alone cannot explain the morphological shape of the observational delay time distribution, while the double degenerate scenario (or a combination of both) can. Most of these double degenerate type Ia supernovae are created through a normal quasi-conservative Roche lobe overflow followed by a common envelope phase, not through two successive common envelope phases. This may cast doubt on the use in other studies of analytical formalisms to determine delay times. In terms of absolute number, theoretical supernova Ia rates in old elliptical galaxies lie a factor of at least three below the observed ones. We propose a solution involving the effect of rotation on the evolution of intermediate mass binaries.
The impact of Type Ia supernova ejecta on a helium-star companion is investigated via high-resolution, two-dimensional hydrodynamic simulations. For a range of helium-star models and initial binary separations it is found that the mass unbound in the interaction, $\delta M_{\rm ub}$, is related to the initial binary separation, $a$, by a power law of the form $\delta M_{\rm ub} \propto a^{m}$. This power-law index is found to vary from -3.1 to -4.0, depending on the mass of the helium star. The small range of this index brackets values found previously for hydrogen-rich companions, suggesting that the dependence of the unbound mass on orbital separation is not strongly sensitive to the nature of the binary companion. The kick velocity is also related to the initial binary separation by a power law with an index in a range from -2.7 to -3.3, but the power-law index differs from those found in previous studies for hydrogen-rich companions. The space motion of the companion after the supernova is dominated by its orbital velocity in the pre-supernova binary system. The level of Ni/Fe contamination of the companion resulting from the passage of the supernova ejecta is difficult to estimate, but an upper limit on the mass of bound nickel is found to be $\sim 5\times 10^{-4}\ M_\odot$.
Recent observational results found a bend in the Tully-Fisher Relation in such a way that low mass systems lay below the linear relation described by more massive galaxies. We intend to investigate the origin of the observed features in the stellar and baryonic Tully-Fisher relations and analyse the role played by galactic outflows on their determination. Cosmological hydrodynamical simulations which include Supernova feedback were performed in order to follow the dynamical evolution of galaxies. We found that Supernova feedback is a fundamental process in order to reproduce the observed trends in the stellar Tully-Fisher relation. Simulated slow rotating systems tend to have lower stellar masses than those predicted by the linear fit to the massive end of the relation, consistently with observations. This feature is not present if Supernova feedback is turned off. In the case of the baryonic Tully-Fisher relation, we also detect a weaker tendency for smaller systems to lie below the linear relation described by larger ones. This behaviour arises as a result of the more efficient action of Supernovae in the regulation of the star formation process and in the triggering of powerful galactic outflows in shallower potential wells which may heat up and/or expel part of the gas reservoir.
Nucleosynthetic yield predictions for multi-dimensional simulations of thermonuclear supernovae generally rely on the tracer particle method to obtain isotopic information of the ejected material for a given supernova simulation. We investigate how many tracer particles are required to determine converged integrated total nucleosynthetic yields. For this purpose, we conduct a resolution study in the number of tracer particles for different hydrodynamical explosion models at fixed spatial resolution. We perform hydrodynamic simulations on a co-expanding Eulerian grid in two dimensions assuming rotational symmetry for both pure deflagration and delayed detonation Type Ia supernova explosions. Within a given explosion model, we vary the number of tracer particles to determine the minimum needed for the method to give a robust prediction of the integrated yields of the most abundant nuclides. For the first time, we relax the usual assumption of constant tracer particle mass and introduce a radially vary- ing distribution of tracer particle masses. We find that the nucleosynthetic yields of the most abundant species (mass fraction > 10E-5) are reasonably well predicted for a tracer number as small as 32 per axis and direction - more or less independent of the explosion model. We conclude that the number of tracer particles that were used in extant published works appear to have been sufficient as far as integrated yields are concerned for the most copiously produced nuclides. Additionally we find that a suitably chosen tracer mass distribution can improve convergence for nuclei produced in the outer layer of the supernova where the constant tracer mass prescription suffers from poor spatial resolution.
We used the Spitzer Space Telescope's Infrared Spectrograph to create a high resolution spectral map of the central region of the Cassiopeia A supernova remnant, allowing us to make a Doppler reconstruction of its 3D structure. The ejecta responsible for this emission have not yet encountered the remnant's reverse shock or the circumstellar medium, making it an ideal laboratory for exploring the dynamics of the supernova explosion itself. We observe that the O, Si, and S ejecta can form both sheet-like structures as well as filaments. Si and O, which come from different nucleosynthetic layers of the star, are observed to be coincident in velocity space in some regions, and separated by 500 km/s or more in others. Ejecta traveling toward us are, on average, ~900 km/s slower than the material traveling away from us. We compare our observations to recent supernova explosion models and find that no single model can simultaneously reproduce all the observed features. However, models of different supernova explosions can collectively produce the observed geometries and structures of the interior emission. We use the results from the models to address the conditions during the supernova explosion, concentrating on asymmetries in the shock structure. We also predict that the back surface of Cassiopeia A will begin brightening in ~30 years, and the front surface in ~100 years.
The unique Honeycomb nebula, most likely a peculiar supernova remnant, lies in 30 Doradus in the Large Magellanic Cloud. Due to its proximity to SN1987A, it has been serendipitously and intentionally observed at many wavelengths. Here, an optical spectral analysis of forbidden line ratios is performed in order to compare the Honeycomb high-speed gas with supernova remnants in the Galaxy and the LMC, with galactic Wolf-Rayet nebulae and with the optical line emission from the interaction zone of the SS433 microquasar and W50 supernova remnant system. An empirical spatiokinematic model of the images and spectra for the Honeycomb reveals that its striking appearance is most likely due to a fortuitous viewing angle. The Honeycomb nebula is more extended in soft X-ray emission and could in fact be a small part of the edge of a giant LMC shell revealed for the first time in this short wavelength domain. It is also suggested that a previously unnoticed region of optical emission may in fact be an extension of the Honeycomb around the edge of this giant shell. A secondary supernova explosion in the edge of a giant shell is considered for the creation of the Honeycomb nebula. A microquasar origin of the Honeycomb nebula as opposed to a simple supernova origin is also evaluated.
Measurements of the equation of state of dark energy from surveys of thousands of Type Ia Supernovae (SNe Ia) will be limited by spectroscopic follow-up and must therefore rely on photometric identification, increasing the chance that the sample is contaminated by Core Collapse Supernovae (CC SNe). Bayesian methods for supernova cosmology can remove contamination bias while maintaining high statistical precision but are sensitive to the choice of parameterization of the contaminating distance distribution. We use simulations to investigate the form of the contaminating distribution and its dependence on the absolute magnitudes, light curve shapes, colors, extinction, and redshifts of core collapse supernovae. We find that the CC luminosity function dominates the distance distribution function, but its shape is increasingly distorted as the redshift increases and more CC SNe fall below the survey magnitude limit. The shapes and colors of the CC light curves generally shift the distance distribution, and their effect on the CC distances is correlated. We compare the simulated distances to the first year results of the SDSS-II SN survey and find that the SDSS distance distributions can be reproduced with simulated CC SNe that are ~1 mag fainter than the standard Richardson et al. (2002) luminosity functions, which do not produce a good fit. To exploit the full power of the Bayesian parameter estimation method, parameterization of the contaminating distribution should be guided by the current knowledge of the CC luminosity functions, coupled with the effects of the survey selection and magnitude-limit, and allow for systematic shifts caused by the parameters of the distance fit.
One prediction of particle acceleration in the supernova remnants in the magnetic wind of exploding Wolf Rayet and Red Super Giant stars is that the final spectrum is a composition of a spectrum $E^{-7/3}$ and a polar cap component of $E^{-2}$ at the source. This polar cap component contributes to the total energy content with only a few percent, but dominates the spectrum at higher energy. The sum of both components gives spectra which curve upwards. The upturn was predicted to occur always at the same rigidity. An additional component of cosmic rays from acceleration by supernovae exploding into the Inter-Stellar Medium (ISM) adds another component for Hydrogen and for Helium. After transport the predicted spectra $J(E)$ for the wind-SN cosmic rays are $E^{-8/3}$ and $E^{-7/3}$; the sum leads to an upturn from the steeper spectrum. An upturn has now been seen. Here, we test the observations against the predictions, and show that the observed properties are consistent with the predictions. Hydrogen can be shown to also have a noticeable wind-SN-component. The observation of the upturn in the heavy element spectra being compatible with the same rigidity for all heavy elements supports the magneto-rotational mechanism for these supernovae. This interpretation predicts the observed upturn to continue to curve upwards and approach the $E^{-7/3}$ spectrum. If confirmed, this would strengthen the case that supernovae of very massive stars with magnetic winds are important sources of Galactic cosmic rays.
The timescape cosmology has been proposed as a viable alternative to homogeneous cosmologies with dark energy. It realises cosmic acceleration as an apparent effect that arises in calibrating average cosmological parameters in the presence of spatial curvature and gravitational energy gradients that grow large with the growth of inhomogeneities at late epochs. Recently Kwan, Francis and Lewis [arXiv:0902.4249] have claimed that the timescape model provides a relatively poor fit to the Union and Constitution supernovae compilations, as compared to the standard Lambda CDM model. We show this conclusion is a result of systematic issues in supernova light curve fitting, and of failing to exclude data below the scale of statistical homogeneity, z < 0.033. Using all currently available supernova datasets (Gold07, Union, Constitution, MLCS17, MLCS31, SDSS-II, CSP, Union2), and making cuts at the statistical homogeneity scale, we show that data reduced by the SALT/SALT-II fitters provides Bayesian evidence that favours the spatially flat Lambda CDM model over the timescape model, whereas data reduced with MLCS2k2 fitters gives Bayesian evidence which favours the timescape model over the Lambda CDM model. We discuss the questions of extinction and reddening by dust, and of intrinsic colour variations in supernovae which do not correlate with the decay time, and the likely impact these systematics would have in a scenario consistent with the timescape model.
We analyze the influence of neutrino helicity conversion, $\nu_L \to \nu_R$, on the neutrino flux from a supernova caused by the interaction of the Dirac neutrino magnetic moment with a magnetic field. We show that if the neutrino has a magnetic moment in the interval $10^{-13} \, \mu_{\rm B} < \mu_\nu < 10^{-12} \, \mu_{\rm B}$ and provided that a magnetic field of $\sim 10^{13} - 10^{14}$ G exists in the supernova envelope, a peculiar kind of time evolution of the neutrino signal from the supernova caused by the resonance transition $\nu_L \to \nu_R$ in the magnetic field of the envelope can appear. If a magnetar with a poloidal magnetic field is formed in a supernova explosion, then the neutrino signal could have a pulsating behavior, i.e., a kind of a neutrino pulsar could be observed, when it rotates around an axis that does not coincide with its magnetic moment and when the orientation of its rotation axis is favourable for our observation.
The Fermi $\gamma$-ray space telescope reported the observation of several Galactic supernova remnants recently, with the $\gamma$-ray spectra well described by hadronic $pp$ collisions. The possible neutrino emissions from these Fermi detected supernova remnants are discussed in this work, assuming the hadronic origin of the $\gamma$-ray emission. The muon event rates induced by the neutrinos from these supernova remnants on typical km$^3$ neutrino telescopes, such as the IceCube and the KM3NeT, are calculated. The results show that for most of these supernova remnants the neutrino signals are too weak to be detected by the on-going or up-coming neutrino experiment. Only for the TeV bright sources RX J1713.7-3946 and possibly W28 the neutrino signals can be comparable with the atmospheric background in the TeV region, if the protons can be accelerated to very high energies. The northern hemisphere based neutrino telescope might detect the neutrinos from these two sources.
This study investigates the evolution of Rayleigh-Taylor (R-T) instabilities in Type Ia supernova remnants that are associated with a low adiabatic index gamma, where gamma < 5/3, which reflects the expected change in the supernova shock structure as a result of cosmic-ray particle acceleration. Extreme cases, such as the case with the maximum compression ratio that corresponds to gamma=1.1, are examined. As gamma decreases, the shock compression ratio rises, and an increasingly narrow inter shock region with a more pronounced initial mixture of R-T unstable gas is produced. Consequently, the remnant outline may be perturbed by small-amplitude, small-wavelength bumps. However, as the instability decays over time, the extent of convective mixing in terms of the ratio of the radius of the R-T fingers to the blast wave does not strongly depend on the value of gamma for gamma >= 1.2. As a result of the age of the remnant, the unstable gas cannot extend sufficiently far to form metal-enriched filaments of ejecta material close to the periphery of Tycho's supernova remnant. The consistency of the dynamic properties of Tycho's remnant with the adiabatic model gamma=5/3 reveals that the injection of cosmic rays is too weak to alter the shock structure. Even with very efficient acceleration of cosmic rays at the shock, significantly enhanced mixing is not expected in Type Ia supernova remnants.
We derive the star formation histories of eight dwarf spheroidal (dSph) Milky Way satellite galaxies from their alpha element abundance patterns. Nearly 3000 stars from our previously published catalog (Paper II) comprise our data set. The average [alpha/Fe] ratios for all dSphs follow roughly the same path with increasing [Fe/H]. We do not observe the predicted knees in the [alpha/Fe] vs. [Fe/H] diagram, corresponding to the metallicity at which Type Ia supernovae begin to explode. Instead, we find that Type Ia supernova ejecta contribute to the abundances of all but the most metal-poor ([Fe/H] < -2.5) stars. We have also developed a chemical evolution model that tracks the star formation rate, Types II and Ia supernova explosions, and supernova feedback. Without metal enhancement in the supernova blowout, massive amounts of gas loss define the history of all dSphs except Fornax, the most luminous in our sample. All six of the best-fit model parameters correlate with dSph luminosity but not with velocity dispersion, half-light radius, or Galactocentric distance.
We discuss the diffuse flux of electron neutrinos and antineutrinos from cosmological failed supernovae, stars that collapse directly into a black hole, with no explosion. This flux has a hotter energy spectrum compared to regular, neutron-star forming collapses, and therefore it dominates the total diffuse flux from core collapses above 20-45 MeV of neutrino energy. Reflecting the features of the originally emitted neutrinos, the flux of nu_e and anti-nu_e at Earth is larger for larger survival probability of these species, and for stiffer equations of state of nuclear matter. In the energy window 19-29 MeV, the flux from failed supernovae is susbtantial, ranging from 7% to a dominant fraction of the total flux from all core collapses. It can be as large as phi = 0.38 s^{-1} cm^{-2} for anti-nu_e (phi = 0.28 s^{-1} cm^{-2} for nue), normalized to a local rate of core collapses of R_{cc}(0)=10^{-4} yr^{-1} Mpc^{-3}. In 5 years, a 0.45 Mt water Cherenkov detector should see 5-65 events from failed supernovae, while up to 160 events are expected for the same mass with Gadolinium addition. A 0.1 Mt liquid argon experiment should record 1-11 events. Signatures of neutrinos from failed supernovae are the enhancement of the total rates of events from core collapses (up to a factor of 2) and the appearance of high energy tails in the event spectra.
We have developed a radiative transfer code, CMFGEN, which allows us to model the spectra of massive stars and supernovae. Using CMFGEN we can derive fundamental parameters such as effective temperatures and surface gravities, derive abundances, and place constraints on stellar wind properties. The last of these is important since all massive stars are losing mass via a stellar wind that is driven from the star by radiation pressure, and this mass loss can substantially influence the spectral appearance and evolution of the star. Recently we have extended CMFGEN to allow us to undertake time-dependent radiative transfer calculations of supernovae. Such calculations will be used to place constraints on the supernova progenitor, to place constraints on the supernova explosion and nucleosynthesis, and to derive distances using a physical approach called the "Expanding Photosphere Method". We describe the assumptions underlying the code and the atomic processes involved. A crucial ingredient in the code is the atomic data. For the modeling we require accurate transition wavelengths, oscillator strengths, photoionization cross-sections, collision strengths, autoionization rates, and charge exchange rates for virtually all species up to, and including, cobalt. Presently, the available atomic data varies substantially in both quantity and quality.
We present a model of gamma-ray emission from core-collapse supernovae originating from the explosions of massive young stars. The fast forward shock of the supernova remnant (SNR) can accelerate particles by diffusive shock acceleration (DSA) in a cavern blown by a strong, pre-supernova stellar wind. As a fundamental part of nonlinear DSA, some fraction of the accelerated particles escape the shock and interact with a surrounding massive dense shell producing hard photon emission. To calculate this emission, we have developed a new Monte Carlo technique for propagating the cosmic rays (CRs) produced by the forward shock of the SNR, into the dense, external material. This technique is incorporated in a hydrodynamic model of an evolving SNR which includes the nonlinear feedback of CRs on the SNR evolution, the production of escaping CRs along with those that remain trapped within the remnant, and the broad-band emission of radiation from trapped and escaping CRs. While our combined CR-hydro-escape model is quite general and applies to both core collapse and thermonuclear supernovae, the parameters we choose for our discussion here are more typical of SNRs from very massive stars whose emission spectra differ somewhat from those produced by lower mass progenitors directly interacting with a molecular cloud.
The optical and near-infrared late-time spectrum of the under-luminous Type Ia supernova 2003hv is analysed with a code that computes nebular emission from a supernova nebula. Synthetic spectra based on the classical explosion model W7 are unable to reproduce the large \FeIII/\FeII\ ratio and the low infrared flux at $\sim 1$ year after explosion, although the optical spectrum of SN\,2003hv is reproduced reasonably well for a supernova of luminosity intermediate between normal and subluminous (SN\,1991bg-like) ones. A possible solution is that the inner layers of the supernova ejecta ($v \lsim 8000$\,\kms) contain less mass than predicted by classical explosion models like W7. If this inner region contains $\sim 0.5 \Msun$ of material, as opposed to $\sim 0.9 \Msun$ in Chandrasekhar-mass models developed within the Single Degenerate scenario, the low density inhibits recombination, favouring the large \FeIII/\FeII\ ratio observed in the optical, and decreases the flux in the \FeII\ lines which dominate the IR spectrum. The most likely scenario may be an explosion of a sub-Chandrasekhar mass white dwarf. Alternatively, the violent/dynamical merger of two white dwarfs with combined mass exceeding the Chandrasekhar limit also shows a reduced inner density.
We present the first variability study of the 1720 MHz OH masers located in the Galactic Center. Most of these masers are associated with the interaction between the supernova remnant SgrAEast and the interstellar medium, but a few masers are associated with the Circumnuclear Disk. The monitoring program covered five epochs and a timescale of 20-195 days, during which no masers disappeared and no new masers appeared. All masers have previously been detected in a single epoch observation about one year prior to the start of the monitoring experiment, implying relatively stable conditions for the 1720 MHz OH masers. No extreme variability was detected. The masers associated with the northeastern interaction region between the supernova remnant and the +50km/s molecular cloud show the highest level of variability. This can be explained with the +50km/s molecular cloud being located behind the supernova remnant and with a region of high OH absorbing column density along the line of sight. Possibly the supernova remnant provides additional turbulence to the gas in this region, through which the maser emission must travel. The masers in the southern interaction region are located on the outermost edge of SgrAEast which line of sight is not covered by either absorbing OH gas or a supernova remnant, in agreement with the much lower variability level observed. Similarly, the masers associated with the CND show little variability, consistent with them arising through collisions between relatively large clumps of gas in the CND and no significant amount of turbulent gas along the line of sight.
Type Ia supernovae are key tools for measuring distances on a cosmic scale. They are generally thought to be the thermonuclear explosion of an accreting white dwarf in a close binary system. The nature of the mass donor is still uncertain. In the single-degenerate model it is a main-sequence star or an evolved star, whereas in the double-degenerate model it is another white dwarf. We show that the velocity structure of absorbing material along the line of sight to 35 type Ia supernovae tends to be blueshifted. These structures are likely signatures of gas outflows from the supernova progenitor systems. Thus many type Ia supernovae in nearby spiral galaxies may originate in single-degenerate systems.
Stellar collapse and the subsequent development of a core-collapse supernova explosion emit bursts of gravitational waves (GWs) that might be detected by the advanced generation of laser interferometer gravitational-wave observatories such as Advanced LIGO, Advanced Virgo, and LCGT. GW bursts from core-collapse supernovae encode information on the intricate multi-dimensional dynamics at work at the core of a dying massive star and may provide direct evidence for the yet uncertain mechanism driving supernovae in massive stars. Recent multi-dimensional simulations of core-collapse supernovae exploding via the neutrino, magnetorotational, and acoustic explosion mechanisms have predicted GW signals which have distinct structure in both the time and frequency domains. Motivated by this, we describe a promising method for determining the most likely explosion mechanism underlying a hypothetical GW signal, based on Principal Component Analysis and Bayesian model selection. Using simulated Advanced LIGO noise and assuming a single detector and linear waveform polarization for simplicity, we demonstrate that our method can distinguish magnetorotational explosions throughout the Milky Way (D <~ 10kpc) and explosions driven by the neutrino and acoustic mechanisms to D <~ 2kpc. Furthermore, we show that we can differentiate between models for rotating accretion-induced collapse of massive white dwarfs and models of rotating iron core collapse with high reliability out to several kpc.
Aims: We present a detailed X-ray and radio wavelength study of G308.4-1.4, a candidate supernova remnant (SNR) in the ROSAT All Sky Survey and the MOST supernova remnant catalogue, in order to identify it as a SNR.   Methods: The SNR candidate and its central sources were studied using observations from the Chandra X-ray Observatory, SWIFT, the Australian Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) at 1.4 and 2.5 GHz and WISE infrared observation at 24 $\mu$m.   Results: We conclude that G308.4-1.4 is indeed a supernova remnant by means of its morphology matching at X-ray, radio and infrared wavelength, its spectral energy distribution in the X-ray band and its emission characteristics in the radio band. G308.4-1.4 is a shell-type SNR. X-ray, radio and infrared emission is seen only in the eastern part of the remnant. The X-ray emission can best be described by an absorbed non-equilibrium collisional plasma with a hydrogen density of $n_\mathrm{H}=(1.02\pm 0.04) \times 10^{22}$ cm$^{-2}$, a plasma temperature of $6.3^{+1.2}_{-0.7}$ million Kelvin and an under-abundance of Iron, Neon and Magnesium, as well as an overabundance in Sulfur with respect to the solar values. The SNR has a spectral index in the radio band of $\alpha=-0.7\pm0.2$. A detailed analysis revealed that the remnant is at a distance of 6 to 12 kpc and the progenitor star exploded $\sim 5000$ to 7500 years ago. Two faint X-ray point sources located near to the remnant's geometrical center are detected. Both sources have no counterpart at other wavelengths, leaving them as candidates for the compact remnant of the supernova explosion.
We develop a method to analyze the effect of an asymmetric supernova on hierarchical multiple star systems and we present analytical formulas to calculate orbital parameters for surviving binaries or hierarchical triples and runaway velocities for their dissociating equivalents. The effect of an asymmetric supernova on the orbital parameters of a binary system has been studied to great extent (e.g. Hills 1983; Kalogera 1996; Tauris & Takens 1998), but this effect on higher multiplicity hierarchical systems has not been explored before. With our method, the supernova effect can be computed by reducing the hierarchical multiple to an effective binary by means of recursively replacing the inner binary by an effective star at the center of mass of that binary. We apply our method to a hierarchical triple system similar to the progenitor of PSR J1903+0327 suggested by Portegies Zwart et al. (2011). We confirm their earlier finding that PSR J1903+0327 could have evolved from a hierarchical triple that became unstable and ejected the secondary star of the inner binary. Furthermore, if such as system did evolve via this mechanism the most probable configuration would be a small supernova kick velocity, an inner binary with a large semi-major axis, and the fraction of mass accreted onto the neutron star to the mass lost by the secondary would most likely be between 0.35 and 0.5
We develop a new semi-dynamical method to study shock revival by neutrino heating in core- collapse supernovae. Our new approach is an extension of the previous studies that employ spherically symmetric, steady, shocked accretion flows together with the light bulb approximation. The latter has been widely used in the supernova community for the phenomenological investigation of the criteria for successful supernova explosions. In the present approach, on the other hand, we get rid of the steady-state condition and take into account shock wave motions instead. We have in mind the scenario that not the critical luminosity but the critical fluctuation generated by hydrodynamical instabilities such as SASI and neutrino-driven convection in the post-shock region determines the onset of shock revival. After confirming that the new approach indeed captures the dynamics of revived shock wave qualitatively, we then apply the method to various initial conditions and find that there is a critical fluctuation for shock revival, which can be well fit by the following formula: f_crit ~ 0.8 * (M_in/1.4M_sun) * {1- (rsh/10^8cm)}, in which fcrit denotes the critical pressure fluctuation normalized by the unperturbed post-shock value. Min and rsh stand for the mass of the central compact object and the shock radius, respectively. The critical fluctuation decreases with the shock radius, whereas it increases with the mass of the central object. We discuss the possible implications of our results for 3D effects on shock revival, which is currently controversial in the supernova community.
Motivated by recent observations of the star formation rate density function out to z~7, we describe a simple model for the star formation rate density function at high redshift based on the extended Press-Schechter formalism. This model postulates a starburst following each major merger, lasting for a time t_SF and converting at most f_star of galactic gas into stars. We include a simple physical prescription for supernovae feedback that suppresses star formation in low mass galaxies. Constraining t_SF and f_star to describe the observed star formation rate density at high redshifts, we find that individual starbursts were terminated after a time t_SF~10^7 years. This is comparable to the main-sequence lifetimes of supernova progenitors, indicating that high redshift starbursts are quenched once supernovae feedback had time to develop. High redshift galaxies convert ~10% of their mass into stars for galaxies with star formation rates above ~1 solar mass per year, but a smaller fraction for lower luminosity galaxies. Our best fit model successfully predicts the observed relation between star formation rate and stellar mass at z>~4, while our deduced relation between stellar mass and halo mass is also consistent with data on the dwarf satellites of the Milky Way. We find that supernovae feedback lowers the efficiency of star formation in the lowest mass galaxies and makes their contribution to reionization small. As a result, photo-ionization feedback on low mass galaxy formation does not significantly affect the reionization history. Using a semi-analytic model for the reionization history, we infer that approximately half of the ionizing photons needed to complete reionization have already been observed in star-forming galaxies.
Type 1a supernova magnitudes are used to fit cosmological parameters under the assumption the model will fit the observed redshift dependence. We test this assumption with the Union 2.1 compilation of 580 sources. Several independent tests find the existing model fails to account for a significant correlation of supernova color and redshift. The correlation of magnitude residuals relative to the $\Lambda CDM$ model and $color \times redshift$ has a significance equivalent to 13 standard deviations, as evaluated by randomly shuffling the data. Extending the existing $B-V$ color correction to a relation linear in redshift improves the goodness of fit $\chi^{2}$ by more than 50 units, an equivalent 7-$\sigma$ significance, while adding only one parameter. The $color-redshift$ correlation is quite robust, cannot be attributed to outliers, and passes several tests of consistency. We review previous hints of redshift dependence in color parameters found in bin-by-bin fits interpreted as parameter bias. We show that neither the bias nor the change $\Delta \chi^{2}$ of our study can be explained by those effects. The previously known relation that bluer supernovae have larger absolute luminosity tends to empirically flatten out with increasing redshift. The best-fit cosmological dark energy density parameter is revised from $ \Omega_{\Lambda} =0.71 \pm 0.02$ to $ \Omega_{\Lambda} = 0.74 \pm 0.02$ assuming a flat universe. One possible physical interpretation is that supernovae or their environments evolve significantly with increasing redshift.
Unusual extinction curves of high-redshift QSOs have been taken as evidence that dust is primarily produced by supernovae at high redshift. In particular, the 3000 A Todini-Ferrara-Maiolino kink in the extinction curve of the z = 6.20 SDSS J1048+4637 has been attributed to supernova dust. Here we discuss the challenges in inferring robust extinction curves of high-redshift QSOs and critically assess previous claims of detection of supernova dust. In particular, we address the sensitivity to the choice of intrinsic QSO spectrum, the need for a long wavelength baseline, and the drawbacks in fitting theoretical extinction curves. In a sample of 21 QSOs at z ~ 6 we detect significant ultraviolet extinction using existing broad-band optical, near-infrared, and Spitzer photometry. The median extinction curve is consistent with a Small Magellanic Cloud curve with A_1450 ~ 0.7 mag and does not exhibit any conspicuous (restframe) 2175 A or 3000 A features. For two QSOs, SDSS J1044-0125 at z = 5.78 and SDSS J1030+0524 at z = 6.31, we further present X-shooter spectra covering the wavelength range 0.9-2.5 um. The resulting non-parametric extinction curves do not exhibit the 3000 A kink. Finally, in a re-analysis of literature spectra of SDSS J1048+4637, we do not find evidence for a conspicuous kink. We conclude that the existing evidence for a 3000 A feature is weak and that the overall dust properties at high and low redshift show no significant differences. This, however, does not preclude supernovae from dominating the dust budget at high redshift.
A variety of stellar sources have been proposed for the origin of the short-lived radioisotopes that existed at the time of the formation of the earliest Solar System solids, including Type II supernovae, AGB and super-AGB stars, and Wolf-Rayet star winds. Our previous adaptive mesh hydrodynamics models with the FLASH2.5 code have shown which combinations of shock wave parameters are able to simultaneously trigger the gravitational collapse of a target dense cloud core and inject significant amounts of shock wave gas and dust, showing that thin supernova shocks may be uniquely suited for the task. However, recent meteoritical studies have weakened the case for a direct supernova injection to the presolar cloud, motivating us to re-examine a wider range of shock wave and cloud core parameters, including rotation, in order to better estimate the injection efficiencies for a variety of stellar sources. We find that supernova shocks remain as the most promising stellar source, though planetary nebulae resulting from AGB star evolution cannot be conclusively ruled out. Wolf-Rayet star winds, however, are likely to lead to cloud core shredding, rather than to collapse. Injection efficiencies can be increased when the cloud is rotating about an axis aligned with the direction of the shock wave, by as much as a factor of $\sim 10$. The amount of gas and dust accreted from the post-shock wind can exceed that injected from the shock wave, with implications for the isotopic abundances expected for a supernova source.
The well-established Type Ia remnant of Tycho's supernova (SN 1572) reveals discrepant ambient medium density estimates based on either the measured dynamics or on the X-ray emission properties. This discrepancy can potentially be solved by assuming that the supernova remnant (SNR) shock initially moved through a stellar wind bubble, but is currently evolving in the uniform interstellar medium with a relatively low density.   We investigate this scenario by combining hydrodynamical simulations of the wind-loss phase and the supernova remnant evolution with a coupled X-ray emission model, which includes non-equilibrium ionization. For the explosion models we use the well-known W7 deflagration model and the delayed detonation model that was previously shown to provide good fits to the X-ray emission of Tycho's SNR.   Our simulations confirm that a uniform ambient density cannot simultaneously reproduce the dynamical and X-ray emission properties of Tycho. In contrast, models that considered that the remnant was evolving in a dense, but small, wind bubble reproduce reasonably well both the measured X-ray emission spectrum and the expansion parameter of Tycho's SNR. Finally, we discuss possible mass loss scenarios in the context of single- and double-degenerate models which possible could form such a small dense wind bubble.
A promising model for normal Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) explosions are delayed detonations of Chandrasekhar-mass white dwarfs, in which the burning starts out as a subsonic deflagration and turns at a later phase of the explosion into a supersonic detonation. The mechanism of the underlying deflagration-to-detonation transition (DDT) is unknown in detail, but necessary conditions have been determined recently. The region of detonation initiation cannot be spatially resolved in multi-dimensional full-star simulations of the explosion. We develop a subgrid-scale (SGS) model for DDTs in thermonuclear supernova simulations that is consistent with the currently known constraints. The probability for a DDT to occur is calculated from the distribution of turbulent velocities measured on the grid scale in the vicinity of the flame and the fractal flame surface area that satisfies further physical constraints, such as fuel fraction and fuel density. The implementation of our DDT criterion provides a solid basis for simulations of thermonuclear supernova explosions in the delayed detonation scenario. It accounts for the currently known necessary conditions for the transition and avoids the inclusion of resolution-dependent quantities in the model. The functionality of our DDT criterion is demonstrated on the example of one three-dimensional thermonuclear supernova explosion simulation.
Supernova (SN) explosions are crucial engines driving the evolution of galaxies by shock heating gas, increasing the metallicity, creating dust, and accelerating energetic particles. In 2012 we used the Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array to observe SN 1987A, one of the best-observed supernovae since the invention of the telescope. We present spatially resolved images at 450um, 870um, 1.4mm, and 2.8mm, an important transition wavelength range. Longer wavelength emission is dominated by synchrotron radiation from shock-accelerated particles, shorter wavelengths by emission from the largest mass of dust measured in a supernova remnant (>0.2Msun). For the first time we show unambiguously that this dust has formed in the inner ejecta (the cold remnants of the exploded star's core). The dust emission is concentrated to the center of the remnant, so the dust has not yet been affected by the shocks. If a significant fraction survives, and if SN 1987A is typical, supernovae are important cosmological dust producers.
Supernovae are important probes of the properties of stars at high redshifts because they can be detected at early epochs and their masses can be inferred from their light curves. Finding the first cosmic explosions in the universe will only be possible with the James Webb Space Telescope, the Wide-Field Infrared Survey Telescope and the next generation of extremely large telescopes. But strong gravitational lensing by massive clusters, like those in the Cluster Lensing and Supernova Survey with Hubble (CLASH), could reveal such events now by magnifying their flux by factors of 10 or more. We find that CLASH will likely discover at least 2 - 3 core-collapse supernovae at 5 < z < 12 and perhaps as many as ten. Future surveys of cluster lenses similar in scope to CLASH by the James Webb Space Telescope might find hundreds of these events out to z ~ 15 - 17. Besides revealing the masses of early stars, these ancient supernovae will also constrain cosmic star formation rates in the era of first galaxy formation.
We present the compilation of the first 221 supernovae classified during the Asiago Classification Program (ACP). The details of transients classification and the preliminarily reduced spectra, in fits format, are immediately posted on the Padova-Asiago SN group web site. The achieved performances for the first 2 years of the ACP are analysed, showing that half of all our classifications were made within 5 days from transient detection. The distribution of the supernova types of this sample resembles the distribution of the general list of all the supernovae listed in the Asiago SN catalog (ASNC, Barbon et al. 1999). Finally, we use our sub-sample of 78 core-collapse supernovae, for which we retrieve the host-galaxy morphology and r-band absolute magnitudes, to study the observed subtype distribution in dwarf compared to giant galaxies. This ongoing program will give its contribution to the classification of the large number of transients that will be soon delivered by the Gaia mission.
We revise the bound from the supernova SN1987A on the coupling of ultralight axion-like particles (ALPs) to photons. In a core-collapse supernova, ALPs would be emitted via the Primakoff process, and eventually convert into gamma rays in the magnetic field of the Milky Way. The lack of a gamma-ray signal in the GRS instrument of the SMM satellite in coincidence with the observation of the neutrinos emitted from SN1987A therefore provides a strong bound on their coupling to photons. Due to the large uncertainty associated with the current bound, we revise this argument, based on state-of-the-art physical inputs both for the supernova models and for the Milky-Way magnetic field. Furthermore, we provide major amendments, such as the consistent treatment of nucleon-degeneracy effects and of the reduction of the nuclear masses in the hot and dense nuclear medium of the supernova. With these improvements, we obtain a new upper limit on the photon-ALP coupling: g_{a\gamma} < 5.3 x 10^{-12} GeV^{-1}, for m_a < 4.4 x 10^{-10} eV, and we also give its dependence at larger ALP masses. Moreover, we discuss how much the Fermi-LAT satellite experiment could improve this bound, should a close-enough supernova explode in the near future.
The neutrinos emitted from the proto-neutron star created in a core-collapse supernova must run through a significant amount of turbulence before exiting the star. Turbulence can modify the flavor evolution of the neutrinos imprinting itself upon the signal detected here at Earth. The turbulence effect upon individual neutrinos, and the correlation between pairs of neutrinos, might exhibit sensitivity to the power spectrum of the turbulence and recent analysis of the turbulence in a two-dimensional hydrodynamical simulation of a core-collapse supernova indicates the power spectrum may not be the Kolmogorov 5/3 inverse power law as has been previously assumed. In this paper we study the effect of non-Kolmogorov turbulence power spectra upon neutrinos from a point source as a function of neutrino energy and turbulence amplitude at a fixed post-bounce epoch. We find the two effects of turbulence upon the neutrinos - the distorted phase effect and the stimulated transitions - both possess strong and weak limits in which dependence upon the power spectrum is absent or evident respectively. Since neutrinos of a given energy will exhibit these two effects at different epochs of the supernova each with evolving strength, we find there is sensitivity to the power spectrum present in the neutrino burst signal from a Galactic supernova.
During a detailed search for optical counterparts of known Galactic supernova remnants (SNRs) using the Anglo Australian Observatory/United Kingdom Schmidt Telescope (AAO/UKST) HAlpha survey of the southern Galactic plane we have found characteristic optical HAlpha filaments and associated emission in the area of SNR G213.0-0.6. Although this remnant was previously detected in the radio as a non-thermal source, we also confirm emission at 4850 MHz in the Parkes-MIT-NRAO (PMN) survey and at 1400 MHz in the NRAO/VLA Sky Survey (NVSS). There is an excellent match in morphological structure between the optical (HAlpha) and radio emission. We subsequently obtained optical spectroscopy of selected HAlpha filaments using the South African Astronomical Observatory 1.9-m telescope which confirmed shock excitation typical of supernova remnants. Our discovery of HAlpha emission and the positional match with several radio frequency maps led us to reassign G213.0-0.6 as G213.3-0.4 as these co-ordinates more accurately reflect the actual centre of the SNR shell and hence the most probable place of the original supernova explosion. Support for this new SNR ID comes from the fact that the X-ray source 1RXS J065049.7-003220 is situated in the centre of this new remnant and could be connected with the supernova explosion.
Type Ia supernova (SNe Ia) are thought to originate in the explosion of a white dwarf. The explosion could be triggered by the merger of two white dwarfs ('double-degenerate' origin), or by mass transfer from a companion star (the 'single-degenerate' path). The identity of the progenitor is still controversial; for example, a recent argument against the single-degenerate origin has been widely rejected. One way to distinguish between the double- and single-degenerate progenitors is to look at the center of a known SN Ia remnant to see whether any former companion star is present. A likely ex-companion star for the progenitor of Tycho's supernova has been identified, but that claim is still controversial. Here we report that the central region of the supernova remnant SNR 0509-67.5 (the site of a Type Ia supernova 400+-50 years ago, based on its light echo) in the Large Magellanic Cloud contains no ex-companion star to a limit of V=26.9 magnitude (M_V=+8.4) within the extreme 99.73% region with radius 1.43". The lack of any ex-companion star to deep limits rules out all published single-degenerate models. The only remaining possibility is that the progenitor for this particular SN Ia was a double-degenerate system.
Models for the progenitor systems of Type Ia supernovae can be divided into double-degenerate systems, which contain two white dwarfs, and single-degenerate systems, which contain one white dwarf plus one companion star (either a red giant, a subgiant, or a >1.16 M_sol main sequence star). The white dwarf is destroyed in the supernova explosion, but any non-degenerate companion remains intact. We present the results of a search for an ex-companion star in SNR 0519-69.0, located in the Large Magellanic Cloud, based on images taken with the Hubble Space Telescope with a limiting magnitude of V = 26.05. SNR 0519-69.0 is confidently known to be from a Type Ia supernova based on its light echoes and X-ray spectra. The geometric center of the remnant (based on the H-alpha and X-ray shell) is at 05:19:34.83, -69:02:06.92 (J2000). Accounting for the measurement uncertainties, the orbital velocity, and the kick velocity, any ex-companion star must be within 4.7" of this position at the 99.73% confidence level. This circle contains 27 main sequence stars brighter than V = 22.7, any one of which could be the ex-companion star left over from a supersoft source progenitor system. The circle contains no post-main sequence stars, and this rules out the possibility of all other published single-degenerate progenitor classes (including symbiotic stars, recurrent novae, helium donors, and the spin-up/spin-down models) for this particular supernova. The only remaining possibility is that SNR 0519-69.0 was formed from either a supersoft source or a double-degenerate progenitor system.
Type IIP (Plateau) Supernovae are the most commonly observed variety of core collapse events. They have been detected in a wide range of wavelengths from radio, through optical to X-rays. The standard picture of a type IIP supernova has the blastwave interacting with the progenitor's circumstellar matter to produce a hot region bounded by a forward and a reverse shock. This region is thought to be responsible for most of the X-ray and radio emission from these objects. Yet the origin of X-rays from these supernovae is not well understood quantitatively. The relative contributions of particle acceleration and magnetic field amplification in generating the X-ray and radio emission need to be determined. In this work we analyze archival Chandra observations of SN 2004dj, the nearest supernova since SN 1987A, along with published radio and optical information. We determine the pre-explosion mass loss rate, blastwave velocity, electron acceleration and magnetic field amplification efficiencies. We find that a greater fraction of the thermal energy goes into accelerating electrons than into amplifying magnetic fields. We conclude that the X-ray emission arises out of a combination of inverse Compton scattering by non-thermal electrons accelerated in the forward shock and thermal emission from supernova ejecta heated by the reverse shock.
Although the details of the core-collapse supernova mechanism are not fully understood, it is generally accepted that the energy released in the collapse produces a shock that disrupts the star and produces the explosion. Some of the stellar material does not receive enough energy to escape the potential well of the newly formed neutron star and it falls back on to the core. This fallback plays an important role in setting compact remnant masses and has been invoked to explain a number of observed phenomena: late-time neutrino emission, r-process element production, peculiar supernovae, and long-duration gamma-ray bursts. To examine the link between fallback and these observed phenomena, we must understand the nature of fallback and currently, multiple mechanisms have been proposed that lead to different characteristics of the fallback. In this paper, we model a series of three-dimensional explosions by following the fallback for two different massive progenitors to study both the nature of the fallback and the role of asymmetric explosions on this fallback. One of the most-cited mechanisms behind fallback argues that it is caused by the reverse shock produced when the outward moving supernova shock decelerates in the relatively flat density profile of the stellar envelope. We show that this mechanism plays a minor, if any, role in driving fallback and most supernova fallback is produced by prompt mechanisms.
We report the discovery of an extensive system of scattered light echo arclets associated with the recent supernovae in the local neighbourhood of the Milky Way: Tycho (SN 1572) and Cassiopeia A. Existing work suggests that the Tycho SN was a thermonuclear explosion while the Cas A supernova was a core collapse explosion. Precise classifications according to modern nomenclature require spectra of the outburst light. In the case of ancient SNe, this can only be done with spectroscopy of their light echo, where the discovery of the light echoes from the outburst light is the first step. Adjacent light echo positions suggest that Cas A and Tycho may share common scattering dust structures. If so, it is possible to measure precise distances between historical Galactic supernovae. On-going surveys that alert on the development of bright scattered-light echo features have the potential to reveal detailed spectroscopic information for many recent Galactic supernovae, both directly visible and obscured by dust in the Galactic plane.
We present the results of a systematic numerical study of an alternative progenitor scenario to produce type Ia supernova explosions, which is not restricted to the ignition of a CO white dwarf near the Chandrasekhar mass. In this scenario, a shock-triggered thermonuclear explosion ensues from the collision of two white dwarfs. Consistent modeling of the gas dynamics together with nuclear reactions using both a smoothed particle and a grid-based hydrodynamics code are performed to study the viability of this alternative progenitor channel. We find that shock-triggered ignition and the synthesis of Ni are in fact a natural outcome for moderately massive white dwarf pairs colliding close to head-on. We use a multi-dimensional radiative transfer code to calculate the emergent broadband light curves and spectral time-series of these events. The synthetic spectra and lightcurves compare well with those of normal type Ia supernovae over a similar B-band decline rate and are broadly consistent with the Phillips relation, although a mild dependence on viewing angle is observed due to the asymmetry of the ejected debris. While event rates within galactic centers and globular clusters are found to be much too low to explain the bulk of the type Ia supernovae population, they may be frequent enough to make as much as a one percent contribution to the overall rate. Although these rate estimates are still subject to substantial uncertainties, they do suggest that dense stellar systems should provide upcoming supernova surveys with hundreds of such collision-induced thermonuclear explosions per year.
We study different one-parametric models of type Ia Supernova magnitude evolution on cosmic time scales. Constraints on cosmological and Supernova evolution parameters are obtained by combined fits on the actual data coming from Supernovae, the cosmic microwave background, and baryonic acoustic oscillations. We find that data prefer a magnitude evolution such that high-redshift Supernova are brighter than would be expected in a standard cosmos with a dark energy component. Data however are consistent with non-evolving magnitudes at the one-sigma level, except special cases.   We simulate a future data scenario where SN magnitude evolution is allowed for, and neglect the possibility of such an evolution in the fit. We find the fiducial models for which the wrong model assumption of non-evolving SN magnitude is not detectable, and for which at the same time biases on the fitted cosmological parameters are introduced. Of the cosmological parameters the overall mass density has the strongest chances to be biased due to the wrong model assumption. Whereas early-epoch models with a magnitude offset ~z^2 show up to be not too dangerous when neglected in the fitting procedure, late epoch models with magnitude offset ~sqrt(z) have high chances to bias the fit results.
We present a new series of supernova neutrino light curves and spectra calculated by numerical simulations for a variety of progenitor stellar masses (13-50Msolar) and metallicities (Z = 0.02 and 0.004), which would be useful for a broad range of supernova neutrino studies, e.g., simulations of future neutrino burst detection by underground detectors, or theoretical predictions for the relic supernova neutrino background. To follow the evolution from the onset of collapse to 20 s after the core bounce, we combine the results of neutrino-radiation hydrodynamic simulations for the early phase and quasi-static evolutionary calculations of neutrino diffusion for the late phase, with different values of shock revival time as a parameter that should depend on the still unknown explosion mechanism. We here describe the calculation methods and basic results including the dependence on progenitor models and the shock revival time. The neutrino data are publicly available electronically.
Time delays of gravitationally lensed sources can be used to constrain the mass model of a deflector and determine cosmological parameters. We here present an analysis of the time-delay distribution of multiply imaged sources behind 17 strong lensing galaxy clusters with well-calibrated mass models. We find that for time delays less than 1000 days, at z=3.0, their logarithmic probability distribution functions are well represented by P (log \Delta t)=5.3 x 10^-4 \Delta t^\beta M_250^-2\beta, with \beta=0.77, where M_250 is the projected cluster mass inside 250 kpc (in 10^14 M_sun), and \beta is the power-law slope of the distribution. The resultant probability distribution function enables us to estimate the time-delay distribution in a lensing cluster of known mass. For a cluster with M_250=2 x 10^14 M_sun, the fraction of time delays less than 1000 days is approximately 3%. Taking Abell 1689 as an example, its dark halo and brightest galaxies, with central velocity dispersions larger than 500 km/s, mainly produce large time delays, while galaxy-scale mass clumps are responsible for generating smaller time delays. We estimate the probability of observing multiple images of a supernova in the known images of Abell 1689. A two-component model of estimating the supernova rate is applied in this work. For a magnitude threshold of m_AB=26.5, the yearly rate of Type Ia (core-collapse) supernovae with time delays less than 1000 days is 0.004 +- 0.002 (0.029 +- 0.001). If the magnitude threshold is lowered to m_AB ~ 27.0, the rate of core-collapse supernovae suitable for time delay observation is 0.044 +- 0.015 per year.
There is general agreement that supernovae Ia correspond to the thermonuclear runaway of a white dwarf that is part of a compact binary, but the details of the progenitor systems are still unknown and much debated. One of the proposed progenitor theories is the single-degenerate channel in which a white dwarf accretes from a companion, grows in mass, reaches a critical mass limit, and is then consumed after thermonuclear runaway sets in. However, there are major disagreements about the theoretical delay time distribution and the corresponding time-integrated supernova Ia rate from this channel. We investigate whether the differences are due to the uncertainty in the common envelope phase and the fraction of transferred mass that is retained by the white dwarf. This so-called retention efficiency may have a strong influence on the final amount and timing of supernovae Ia. Using the population synthesis code SeBa, we simulated large numbers of binaries for various assumptions on common envelopes and retention efficiencies. We compare the resulting supernova Ia rates and delay time distributions with each other and with those from the literature, including observational data. For the three assumed retention efficiencies, the integrated rate varies by a factor 3-4 to even more than a factor 100, so in extreme cases, the retention efficiency strongly suppresses the single-degenerate channel. Our different assumptions for the common envelope phase change the integrated rate by a factor 2-3. Although our results do recover the trend in the theoretical predictions from different binary population synthesis codes, they do not fully explain the large disagreement among them.
We present a novel class of models for Type Ia supernova time-evolving spectral energy distributions (SED) and absolute magnitudes: they are each modeled as stochastic functions described by Gaussian processes. The values of the SED and absolute magnitudes are defined through well-defined regression prescriptions, so that data directly inform the models. As a proof of concept, we implement a model for synthetic photometry built from the spectrophotometric time series from the Nearby Supernova Factory. Absolute magnitudes at peak $B$ brightness are calibrated to 0.13 mag in the $g$-band and to as low as 0.09 mag in the $z=0.25$ blueshifted $i$-band, where the dispersion includes contributions from measurement uncertainties and peculiar velocities. The methodology can be applied to spectrophotometric time series of supernovae that span a range of redshifts to simultaneously standardize supernovae together with fitting cosmological parameters.
Assuming a Salpeter initial mass function and taking the solar abundances as a representative sample, we explore the sensitivity of nucleosynthesis in massive stars to the truncation of supernova explosions above a certain mass. It is assumed that stars of all masses contribute to nucleosynthesis by their pre-explosive winds, but above a certain limiting main sequence mass, the presupernova star becomes a black hole and ejects nothing more. The solar abundances from oxygen to atomic mass 90 are fit quite well assuming no cut-off at all, i.e., by assuming all stars up to 120 solar masses make successful supernovae. Little degradation in the fit occurs if the upper limit is reduced to 25 solar masses. The limit can be further reduced, but the required event rate of supernovae in the remaining range rises rapidly to compensate for the lost nucleosynthesis of the more massive stars. The nucleosynthesis of the s-process declines precipitously and the production of species made in the winds, e.g., carbon, becomes unacceptably large compared with elements made in the explosion, e.g., silicon and oxygen. However, by varying uncertain physics, especially the mass loss rate for massive stars and the rate for the neon-22 to magnesium-25 reaction rate, acceptable nucleosynthesis might still be achieved with a cutoff as low as 18 solar masses. This would require a supernova frequency three times greater than the fiducial value obtained when all stars explode in order to produce the required oxygen-16. The nucleosynthesis of iron-60 and aluminum-26 is also examined.
We present analysis of Chandra archival, pre-explosion data of the positions of three nearby (< 25 Mpc) type Ia supernovae, SN2011iv, SN2012cu & SN2012fr. No sources corresponding to the progenitors were found in any of the observations. Combining all sources with well defined backgrounds does not reveal any evidence for X-ray emission from the progenitors either. We calculated upper limits on the bolometric luminosities of the progenitors, under the assumption that they were black bodies with effective temperatures between 30 and 150 eV, corresponding to 'canonical' supersoft X-ray sources. The upper limits of SN2012fr straddles the Eddington luminosity of canonical supersoft sources, but fainter canonical supersoft sources cannot be ruled out by this study. We also compare our upper limits with known compact binary supersoft X-ray sources. This study is a continuation of the campaign to directly detect or constrain the X-ray characteristics of pre-explosion observations of nearby type Ia supernova progenitors; with the results reported in Nielsen, Voss & Nelemans (see reference in Introduction), the number of nearby type Ia supernovae for which pre-explosion images are available in the Chandra archive is now 13 and counting.
SMC X-1 is a high-mass X-ray binary with an orbital period of 3.9 days. The mass of the neutron star is as low as $\sim 1 M_{\sun}$, suggesting that it was likely to be formed through an electron-capture supernova rather an iron-core collapse supernova. From the present system configurations, we argue that the orbital period at the supernova was $\lesssim 10$ days. Since the mass transfer process between the neutron star's progenitor and the companion star before the supernova should have increased the orbital period to tens of days, a mechanism with efficient orbit angular momentum loss and relatively small mass loss is required to account for its current orbital period. We have calculated the evolution of the progenitor binary systems from zero-age main-sequence to the pre-supernova stage with different initial parameters and various mass and angular momentum loss mechanisms. Our results show that the outflow from the outer Langrangian point or a circumbinary disk formed during the mass transfer phase may be qualified for this purpose. We point out that these mechanisms may be popular in binary evolution and significantly affect the formation of compact star binaries.
One of the main questions concerning Type Ia supernovae is the nature of the binary companion of the exploding white dwarf. A major discriminant between different suggested models is the presence and physical properties of circumstellar material at the time of explosion. If present, this material will be ionized by the ultra-violet radiation of the explosion and later recombine. This ionization-recombination should manifest itself as time-variable absorption features that can be detected via multi-epoch high-spectral-resolution observations. Previous studies have shown that the strongest effect is seen in the neutral sodium D lines. We report on observations of neutral sodium absorption features observed in multi-epoch high-resolution spectra of 14 Type Ia supernova events. This is the first multi-epoch high-resolution study to include multiple SNe. No variability in line strength that can be associated with circumstellar material is detected. We find that ~18% of the events in the extended sample exhibit time-variable sodium features associated with circumstellar material. We explore the implication of this study on our understanding of the progenitor systems of Type Ia supernovae via the current Type Ia supernova multi-epoch high-spectral-resolution sample.
Wolf-Rayet stars are known to eject winds. Thus, when a Wolf-Rayet star explodes as a supernova, a fast, $>30,000$ km/s, shock is expected to be driven through a wind. We study the signal expected from a fast supernova shock propagating through an optically thick wind, and find that the electrons behind the shock driven into the wind are cooled efficiently, by inverse Compton over soft photons that were deposited by the radiation mediated shock that crossed the star. Therefore, the bolometric luminosity is comparable to the kinetic energy flux through the shock, and the spectrum is found to be a power-law, which slope and frequency range depend on the number flux of soft photons available for cooling. Wolf-Rayet supernovae that explode through a thick wind have a high flux of soft photons, producing a flat spectrum, $\nu F_{\nu}=Const$, in the X-ray range $0.1\lesssim T\lesssim 50$ keV. As the shock expands into an optically thin wind, the soft photons are no longer able to cool the shock that plows through the wind, and the bulk of the emission takes the form of a standard core-collapse supernova (without a wind). However, a small fraction of the soft photons is upscattered by the shocked wind and produces a transient unique X-ray signature.
The era of the universe's first (Population III) stars is essentially unconstrained by observation. Ultra-luminous and massive stars from this time altered the chemistry of the cosmos, provided the radiative scaffolding to support the formation of the first protogalaxies, and facilitated the creation and growth of now-supermassive black holes. Unfortunately, because these stars lie literally at the edge of the observable universe, they will remain beyond the reach of even the next generation of telescopes such as the James Webb Space Telescope and the Thirty-Meter Telescope. In this paper, we provide a primer to supernovae modeling and the first stars to make our discussion accessible to those new to or outside our field. We review recent work of the Los Alamos Supernova Light Curve Project and Brigham Young University to explore the possibility of probing this era through observations of the spectacular deaths of the first stars. We find that many such brilliant supernova explosions will be observable as far back as $\sim 99$% of the universe's current age, tracing primordial star formation rates and the locations of their protogalaxies on the sky. The observation of Population III supernovae will be among the most spectacular discoveries in observational astronomy in the coming decade.
An increasing number of so-called superluminous supernovae (SLSNe) are discovered. It is believed that at least some of them with slowly fading light curves originate in stellar explosions induced by the pair instability mechanism. Recent stellar evolution models naturally predict pair instability supernovae (PISNe) from very massive stars at wide range of metallicities (up to Z=0.006, Yusof et al. 2013). In the scope of this study we analyse whether PISN models can match the observational properties of SLSNe with various light curve shapes. Specifically, we explore the influence of different degrees of macroscopic chemical mixing in PISN explosive products on the resulting observational properties. We artificially apply mixing to the 250 Msun PISN evolutionary model from Kozyreva et al. (2014) and explore its supernova evolution with the one-dimensional radiation hydrodynamics code STELLA. The greatest success in matching SLSN observations is achieved in the case of an extreme macroscopic mixing, where all radioactive material is ejected into the hydrogen-helium outer layer. Such an extreme macroscopic redistribution of chemicals produces events with faster light curves with high photospheric temperatures and high photospheric velocities. These properties fit a wider range of SLSNe than non-mixed PISN model. Our mixed models match the light curves, colour temperature and photospheric velocity evolution of two well-observed SLSNe PTF12dam and LSQ12dlf. However, these models' extreme chemical redistribution may be hard to realise in massive PISNe. Therefore, alternative models such as the magnetar mechanism or wind-interaction may still to be favourable to interpret rapidly rising SLSNe.
New evidence that cosmic rays (hadronic component) are accelerated by supernova remnant shocks all the way from low energies to high energies, has come from recent works combining gamma-ray observations in the sub-GeV to TeV domain on the one hand, and in the submm-mm domain on the other hand. These observations concern the specific cases of supernova remnants interacting with molecular cloud complexes, that have long been suspected to be ideal laboratories to study in situ cosmic ray acceleration and diffusion. Indeed, enhanced gamma-ray emission from neutral pion decay, as well as enhanced ionization (both by at least one order of magnitude with respect to average galactic values) have been observed in several regions of massive star formation housing supernova remnants interacting with molecular cloud complexes. This paper summarizes the main physical and chemical processes at work, as well as recent observations, that further support the paradigm of cosmic ray acceleration by supernova remnants all the way from the MeV domain up to several tens of TeV, although much work remains to be done to understand cosmic ray penetration and diffusion inside and around molecular clouds, and reveal the actual spectrum of the accelerated cosmic rays.
Two main hypotheses for the origin of Galactic cosmic rays are the "supernova" and "superbubble" origin hypotheses. We analyse the evidence for the superbubble hypothesis provided by the measurements of the relativive abundances of isotopes of cobalt and nickel in the cosmic ray flux. We compare the measured upper limit on the abundance of 59Ni in the cosmic ray flux with the 59Ni abundance predictions of the up-to-date stellar evolution models. Non-detection of 59Ni in the cosmic ray flux has previously been attributed to a large time delay of the order of 1e5 yr between the moment of supernova explosion and the onset of particle acceleration process. This large time delay was considered as an argument in favour of the "superbubble" scenario. We show that the recent calculation of the 59Ni yield of massive stars, which takes into account the initial mass range up to 120 solar masses and includes stellar rotation, results in prediction of low 59Ni abundance relative to its decay product 59Co. The predicted abundance is consistent with the upper bound on 59Ni abundance in the cosmic ray flux for the supernova parameters assumed. This result removes the necessity of decay of 59Ni in the time interval between the supernova explosion and the onset of acceleration process and restores the consistency of measurements of 59Ni / 59Co abundances with the "supernova" hypothesis of the CR origin.
Metals from Population III (Pop III) supernovae led to the formation of less massive Pop II stars in the early universe, altering the course of evolution of primeval galaxies and cosmological reionization. There are a variety of scenarios in which heavy elements from the first supernovae were taken up into second-generation stars, but cosmological simulations only model them on the largest scales. We present small-scale, high-resolution simulations of the chemical enrichment of a primordial halo by a nearby supernova after partial evaporation by the progenitor star. We find that ejecta from the explosion crash into and mix violently with ablative flows driven off the halo by the star, creating dense, enriched clumps capable of collapsing into Pop II stars. Metals may mix less efficiently with the partially exposed core of the halo, so it might form either Pop III or Pop II stars. Both Pop II and III stars may thus form after the collision if the ejecta do not strip all the gas from the halo. The partial evaporation of the halo prior to the explosion is crucial to its later enrichment by the supernova.
Supernova 1978K is one of the oldest-known examples of the class of Type IIn supernovae that show evidence for strong interaction between the blast wave and a dense, pre-existing circumstellar medium. Here we report detections of SN 1978K at both 34 GHz and 94 GHz, making it only the third extragalactic supernova (after SN 1987A and SN 1996cr) to be detected at late-times at these frequencies. We find SN 1978K to be >400 times more luminous than SN 1987A at millimetre wavelengths in spite of the roughly nine year difference in ages, highlighting the risk in adopting SN 1987A as a template for the evolution of core-collapse supernovae in general. Additionally, from new VLBI observations at 8.4 GHz, we measure a deconvolved diameter for SN 1978K of ~5 milli-arcsec, and a corresponding average expansion velocity of <1500 km/s. These observations provide independent evidence of an extremely dense circumstellar medium surrounding the progenitor star.
Carbon-rich grains are observed to condense in the ejecta of recent core-collapse supernovae, within a year after the explosion. Silicon carbide grains of type X are C-rich grains with isotpic signatures of explosive supernova nucleosynthesis have been found in primitive meteorites. Much rarer silicon carbide grains of type C are a special sub-group of SiC grains from supernovae. They show peculiar abundance signatures for Si and S, isotopically heavy Si and isotopically light S, which appear to to be in disagreement with model predictions. We propose that C grains are formed mostly from C-rich stellar material exposed to lower SN shock temperatures than the more common type X grains. In this scenario, extreme $^{32}$S enrichments observed in C grains may be explained by the presence of short-lived $^{32}$Si ($\tau$$_{1/2}$ = 153 years) in the ejecta, produced by neutron capture processes starting from the stable Si isotopes. No mixing from deeper Si-rich material and/or fractionation of Si from S due to molecular chemistry is needed to explain the $^{32}$S enrichments. The abundance of $^{32}$Si in the grains can provide constraints on the neutron density reached during the supernova explosion in the C-rich He shell material. The impact of the large uncertainty of the neutron capture cross sections in the $^{32}$Si region is discussed.
Observational identification of the first stars is one of the great challenges in the modern astronomy. Although a single first star is too faint to be detected, supernova explosions of the first stars can be bright enough. An important question is whether such supernovae can be detected in the limited observational area with realistic observational resources. We perform detailed simulations to study the detectability of superluminous supernovae (SLSNe) at high redshifts, using the observationally-calibrated star formation rate density and supernova occurrence rate. We show that a 100 deg^2 survey with the limiting magnitude of 26 mag in near-infrared wavelengths will be able to discover about 10 SLSNe at z > 10. If the survey is extended to 200 deg^2 with 27 mag depth, about 10 SLSNe can be discovered at z > 15. We emphasize that the observations at > 3 um are crucial to detect and select SLSNe at z > 10. Our simulations are also applied to the planned survey with Euclid, WFIRST, and WISH. These surveys will be able to detect about 1000, 400, and 3000 SLSNe up to z ~ 5, 7, and 12, respectively. We conclude that detection of SLSNe at z > 10 is in fact achievable in the near future.
The expanding remnant from SN 1987A is an excellent laboratory for investigating the physics of supernovae explosions. There are still a large number of outstanding questions, such the reason for the asymmetric radio morphology, the structure of the pre-supernova environment, and the efficiency of particle acceleration at the supernova shock. We explore these questions using three-dimensional simulations of the expanding remnant between days 820 and 10,000 after the supernova. We combine a hydrodynamical simulation with semi-analytic treatments of diffusive shock acceleration and magnetic field amplification to derive radio emission as part of an inverse problem. Simulations show that an asymmetric explosion, combined with magnetic field amplification at the expanding shock, is able to replicate the persistent one-sided radio morphology of the remnant. We use an asymmetric Truelove & McKee progenitor with an envelope mass of $10 M_{\sun}$ and an energy of $1.5 \times 10^{44} J$. A termination shock in the progenitor's stellar wind at a distance of $0\farcs43-0\farcs51$ provides a good fit to the turn on of radio emission around day 1200. For the H\textsc{ii} region, a minimum distance of $0\farcs63\pm0\farcs01$ and maximum particle number density of $(7.11\pm1.78) \times 10^7$ m$^{-3}$ produces a good fit to the evolving average radius and velocity of the expanding shocks from day 2000 to day 7000 after explosion. The model predicts a noticeable reduction, and possibly a temporary reversal, in the asymmetric radio morphology of the remnant after day 7000, when the forward shock left the eastern lobe of the equatorial ring.
The large-number hypothesis conjectures that fundamental constants may vary. Accordingly, the spacetime variation of fundamental constants has been an active subject of research for decades. Recently, using data obtained with large telescopes a phenomenological model in which the fine structure constant might vary spatially has been proposed. We test whether this hypothetical spatial variation of {\alpha}, which follows a dipole law, is compatible with the data of distant thermonuclear supernovae. Unlike previous works, in our calculations we consider not only the variation of the luminosity distance when a varying {\alpha} is adopted, but we also take into account the variation of the peak luminosity of Type Ia supernovae resulting from a variation of {\alpha}. This is done using an empirical relation for the peak bolometric magnitude of thermonuclear supernovae that correctly reproduces the results of detailed numerical simulations. We find that there is no significant difference between the several phenomenological models studied here and the standard one, in which {\alpha} does not vary spatially. We conclude that the present set of data of Type Ia supernovae is not able to distinguish the standard model from the dipole models, and thus cannot be used to discard nor to confirm the proposed spatial variation of {\alpha}.
A high-statistics measurement of the neutrinos from a galactic core-collapse supernova is extremely important for understanding the explosion mechanism, and studying the intrinsic properties of neutrinos themselves. In this paper, we explore the possibility to constrain the absolute scale of neutrino masses $m^{}_\nu$ via the detection of galactic supernova neutrinos at the Jiangmen Underground Neutrino Observatory (JUNO) with a 20 kiloton liquid-scintillator detector. In assumption of a nearly-degenerate neutrino mass spectrum and a normal mass ordering, the upper bound on the absolute neutrino mass is found to be $m^{}_\nu < (0.83 \pm 0.24)~{\rm eV}$ at the 95% confidence level for a typical galactic supernova at a distance of 10 kpc, where the mean value and standard deviation are shown to account for statistical fluctuations. For comparison, we find that the bound in the Super-Kamiokande experiment is $m^{}_\nu < (0.94 \pm 0.28)~{\rm eV}$ at the same confidence level. However, the upper bound will be relaxed when the model parameters characterizing the time structure of supernova neutrino fluxes are not exactly known, and when the neutrino mass ordering is inverted.
The massive cluster MACSJ1149.5+2223(z=0.544) displays five very large lensed images of a well resolved spiral galaxy at $z_{\rm spect}=1.491$. It is within one of these images that the first example of a multiply-lensed supernova has been detected recently as part of the Grism Lens-Amplified Survey from Space. The depth of this data also reveals many HII regions within the lensed spiral galaxy which we identify between the five counter-images. Here we expand the capability of our free-form method to incorporate these HII regions locally, with other reliable lensed galaxies added for a global solution. This improved accuracy allows us to estimate when the Refsdal supernova will appear within the other lensed images of the spiral galaxy to an accuracy of $\sim$ 7\%. We predict this supernova will reappear in one of the counter-images (RA=11:49:36.025, DEC=+22:23:48.11, J2000) and on November 1$^{st}$ 2015 (with an estimated error of $\pm$ 25 days) it will be at the same phase as it was when it was originally discovered, offering a unique opportunity to study the early phases of this supernova and to examine the consistency of the mass model and the cosmological model that have an impact on the time delay prediction.
While recent supernova cosmology research has benefited from improved measurements, current analysis approaches are not statistically optimal and will prove insufficient for future surveys. This paper discusses the limitations of current supernova cosmological analyses in treating outliers, selection effects, shape- and color-standardization relations, unexplained dispersion, and heterogeneous observations. We present a new Bayesian framework, called UNITY (Unified Nonlinear Inference for Type-Ia cosmologY), that incorporates significant improvements in our ability to confront these effects. We apply the framework to real supernova observations and demonstrate smaller statistical and systematic uncertainties. We verify earlier results that SNe Ia require nonlinear shape and color standardizations, but we now include these nonlinear relations in a statistically well-justified way. This analysis was primarily performed blinded, in that the basic framework was first validated on simulated data before transitioning to real data. We also discuss possible extensions of the method.
The light curves of some luminous supernovae are suspected to be powered by the spindown energy of a rapidly rotating magnetar. Here we describe a possible signature of the central engine: a burst of shock breakout emission occurring several days after the supernova explosion. The energy input from the magnetar inflates a high-pressure bubble that drives a shock through the pre-exploded supernova ejecta. If the magnetar is powerful enough, that shock will near the ejecta surface and become radiative. At the time of shock breakout, the ejecta will have expanded to a large radius (~10^{14} cm) so that the radiation released is at optical/ultraviolet wavelengths (T ~ 20,000 K) and lasts for several days. The luminosity and timescale of this magnetar driven shock breakout are similar to the first peak observed recently in the double-peaked light curve of SNLSQ14BDQ. However, for a large region of model parameter space, the breakout emission is predicted to be dimmer than the diffusive luminosity from direct magnetar heating. A distinct double peaked light curve may therefore only be conspicuous if thermal heating from the magnetar is suppressed at early times. We describe how such a delay in heating may naturally result from inefficient dissipation and thermalization of the pulsar wind magnetic energy. Without such suppression, the breakout may only be noticeable as a small bump or kink in the early luminosity or color evolution, or as a small but abrupt rise in the photospheric velocity. A similar breakout signature may accompany other central engines in supernovae, such as a black hole accreting fallback material.
Central compact objects (CCOs) are thought to be young thermally emitting isolated neutron stars that were born during the preceding core-collapse supernova explosion. Here we present evidence that at least in one case the CCO could have been formed within a binary system. We show that the highly reddened optical source IRAS~17287$-$3443, located $25^{\prime \prime}$ away from the CCO candidate XMMUJ173203.3$-$344518 and classified previously as a post asymptotic giant branch star, is indeed surrounded by a dust shell. This shell is heated by the central star to temperatures of $\sim90$\,K and observed as extended infrared emission in 8-160\,$\mu$m band. The dust temperature also increases in the vicinity of the CCO which implies that it likely resides within the shell. We estimate the total dust mass to be $\sim0.4-1.5\,M_\odot$ which significantly exceeds expected dust yields by normal stars and thus likely condensed from supernova ejecta. Taking into account that both the age of the supernova remnant and the duration of active mass loss phase by the optical star are much shorter than the total lifetime of either object, the supernova and the onset of the active mass loss phase of the companion have likely occurred approximately simultaneously. This is most easily explained if the evolution of both objects is interconnected. We conclude, therefore, that both stars were likely members of the same binary system disrupted by a supernova.
We model early star forming regions and their chemical enrichment by Population III (Pop III) supernovae with nucleosynthetic yields featuring high [C/Fe] ratios and pair-instability supernova (PISN) signatures. We aim to test how well these chemical abundance signatures are preserved in the gas prior to forming the first long-lived low-mass stars (or second-generation stars). Our results show that second-generation stars can retain the nucleosynthetic signature of their Pop III progenitors, even in the presence of nucleosynthetically normal Pop III core-collapse supernovae. We find that carbon-enhanced metal-poor stars are likely second-generation stars that form in minihaloes. Furthermore, it is likely that the majority of Pop III supernovae produce high [C/Fe] yields. In contrast, metals ejected by a PISN are not concentrated in the first star forming haloes, which may explain the absence of observed PISN signatures in metal-poor stars. We also find that unique Pop III abundance signatures in the gas are quickly wiped out by the emergence of Pop II supernovae. We caution that the observed fractions of stars with Pop III signatures cannot be directly interpreted as the fraction of Pop III stars producing that signature. Such interpretations require modelling the metal enrichment process prior to the second-generation stars' formation, including results from simulations of metal mixing. The full potential of stellar archaeology can likely be reached in ultra-faint dwarf galaxies, where the simple formation history may allow for straightforward identification of second-generation stars.
We present new optical observations of the supernova SN 1978K, obtained in 2007 and 2014 with the Very Large Telescope. We discover that the supernova has not faded significantly, even more than three decades after its explosion. The spectrum exhibits numerous narrow (FWHM $\lesssim600$ km s$^{-1}$) emission lines, indicating that the supernova blastwave is persistently interacting with dense circumstellar material (CSM). Evolution of emission lines indicates that the supernova ejecta is slowly progressing through the reverse shock, and has not expanded past the outer edge of the circumstellar envelope. We demonstrate that the CSM is not likely to be spherically distributed, with mass of $\lesssim$ 1 M$_\odot$. The progenitor mass loss rate is estimated as $\gtrsim 0.01$ M$_\odot$ yr$^{-1}$. The slowly fading late-time light curve and spectra show striking similarity with SN 1987A, indicating that a rate at which the CSM is being swept-up by the blastwave is gradually decaying and SN 1978K is undergoing similar evolution to become a remnant. Due to its proximity (4 Mpc), SN 1978K serves as the next best example of late-time supernova evolution after SN 1987A.
We investigate the expected rates and bolometric light-curve properties of stripped-envelope electron-capture supernovae (ECSNe) using stellar models from the Binary Population and Spectral Synthesis (BPASS) code. We find that 0.8 per cent (Z = 0.020) and 1.2 per cent (Z = 0.004) of core-collapse supernovae are stripped-envelope ECSNe. Their typical ejecta masses are estimated to be about 0.3 Msun (Z = 0.020) and 0.6 Msun (Z = 0.004). Assuming ECSN explosion properties from numerical explosion simulations, an explosion energy of 1.5e50 erg and a 56Ni mass of 2.5e-3 Msun, we find that stripped-envelope ECSNe have a typical rise time of around 7 days (Z = 0.020) or 13 days (Z = 0.004) and peak luminosity of around 1e41 erg/s (-13.8 mag, Z = 0.020) or 7e40 erg/s (-13.4 mag, Z = 0.004). Their typical ejecta velocities are around 7000 km/s (Z = 0.020) or 5000 km/s (Z = 0.004). Thus, stripped-envelope ECSNe are observed as rapidly-evolving faint transients with relatively small velocities. SN 2008ha-like supernovae, which are the faintest kind of SN 2002cx-like (a.k.a. Type Iax) supernovae, may be related to stripped-envelope ECSNe.
We summarize the impact of sterile neutrino dark matter on core-collapse supernova explosions. We explore various oscillations between electron neutrinos or mixed $\mu-\tau$ neutrinos and right-handed sterile neutrinos that may occur within a core-collapse supernova. In particular, we consider sterile neutrino masses and mixing angles that are consistent with sterile neutrino dark matter candidates as indicated by recent X-ray flux measurements. We find that the interpretation of the observed 3.5 keV X-ray excess as due to a decaying 7 keV sterile neutrino that comprises 100\% of the dark matter would have almost no observable effect on supernova explosions. However, in the more realistic case in which the decaying sterile neutrino comprises only a small fraction of the total dark matter density due to the presence of other sterile neutrino flavors, WIMPs, etc., a larger mixing angle is allowed. In this case a 7 keV sterile neutrino could have a significant impact on core-collapse supernovae. We also consider mixing between $\mu-\tau$ neutrinos and sterile neutrinos. We find, however, that this mixing does not significantly alter the explosion and has no observable effect on the neutrino luminosities at early times.
Supernova remnants are believed to be the main sources of galactic Cosmic Rays (CR). Within this framework, particles are accelerated at supernova remnant shocks and then released in the interstellar medium. The mechanism through which CRs are released and the way in which they propagate still remain open issues. The main difficulty is the high non-linearity of the problem: CRs themselves excite the magnetic turbulence that confines them close to their sources. We solve numerically the coupled differential equations describing the evolution in space and time of the escaping particles and of the waves generated through the CR streaming instability. The warm ionized and warm neutral phases of the interstellar medium are considered. These phases occupy the largest fraction of the disc volume, where most supernovae explode, and are characterised by the significant presence of neutral particles. The friction between those neutrals and ions results in a very effective wave damping mechanism. It is found that streaming instability affects the propagation of CRs even in the presence of ion-neutral friction. The diffusion coefficient can be suppressed by more than a factor of $\sim 2$ over a region of few tens of pc around the remnant. The suppression increases for smaller distances. The propagation of $\approx 10$ GeV particles is affected for several tens of kiloyears after escape, while $\approx 1$ TeV particles are affected for few kiloyears. This might have a great impact on the interpretation of gamma-ray observations of molecular clouds located in the vicinity of supernova remnants.
Mergers of two stellar origin black holes are a prime source of gravitational waves and are under intensive investigations. One crucial ingredient in their modeling has so far been neglected. Pair-instability pulsation supernovae with associated severe mass loss may suppress formation of massive black holes, decreasing black hole merger rates for the highest black hole masses.   The mass loss associated with pair-instability pulsation supernovae limits the Population I/II stellar-origin black hole mass to 50 Msun, in tension with earlier predictions that the maximum black hole mass could be as high as 100 Msun.   Suppression of double black hole merger rates by pair-instability pulsation supernovae is negligible for our evolutionary channel. Our standard evolutionary model with inclusion of pair-instability pulsation supernovae and with pair-instability supernovae is fully consistent with the LIGO detections of black hole mergers: GW150914, GW151226 and LVT151012. The LIGO observations seem to exclude high (>400 km/s) BH natal kicks. We predict the detection of several up to 60 BH-BH mergers with total mass 10--150 Msun (most likely range: 20--80 Msun) in the forthcoming 60 effective days of LIGO O2 observations.
The hadron-quark phase transition in core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) has the potential to trigger explosions in otherwise nonexploding models. However, those hybrid supernova equations of state (EOS) shown to trigger an explosion do not support the observational 2 M$_\odot$ neutron star maximum mass constraint. In this work, we analyze cold hybrid stars by the means of a systematic parameter scan for the phase transition properties, with the aim to develop a new hybrid supernova EOS. The hadronic phase is described with the state-of-the-art supernova EOS HS(DD2), and quark matter by an EOS with a constant speed of sound (CSS) of $c_{QM}^2=1/3$. We find promising cases which meet the 2 M$_\odot$ criterion and are interesting for CCSN explosions. We show that the very simple CSS EOS is transferable into the well-known thermodynamic bag model, important for future application in CCSN simulations. In the second part, the occurrence of reconfinement and multiple phase transitions is discussed. In the last part, the influence of hyperons in our parameter scan is studied. Including hyperons no change in the general behavior is found, except for overall lower maximum masses. In both cases (with and without hyperons) we find that quark matter with $c_{QM}^2=1/3$ can increase the maximum mass only if reconfinement is suppressed or if quark matter is absolutely stable.
We describe two new open source tools written in Python for performing extreme deconvolution Gaussian mixture modeling (XDGMM) and using a conditioned model to re-sample observed supernova and host galaxy populations. XDGMM is new program for using Gaussian mixtures to do density estimation of noisy data using extreme deconvolution (XD) algorithms that has functionality not available in other XD tools. It allows the user to select between the AstroML (Vanderplas et al. 2012; Ivezic et al. 2015) and Bovy et al. (2011) fitting methods and is compatible with scikit-learn machine learning algorithms (Pedregosa et al. 2011). Most crucially, it allows the user to condition a model based on the known values of a subset of parameters. This gives the user the ability to produce a tool that can predict unknown parameters based on a model conditioned on known values of other parameters. EmpiriciSN is an example application of this functionality that can be used for fitting an XDGMM model to observed supernova/host datasets and predicting likely supernova parameters using on a model conditioned on observed host properties. It is primarily intended for simulating realistic supernovae for LSST data simulations based on empirical galaxy properties.
Asymptotic Giant Branch stars are known to produce `cosmic' fluorine but it is uncertain whether these stars are the main producers of fluorine in the Solar neighborhood or if any of the other proposed formation sites, type II supernovae and/or Wolf-Rayet stars, are more important. Recent articles have proposed both Asymptotic Giant Branch stars as well as type II supernovae as the dominant sources of fluorine in the Solar neighborhood.   In this paper we set out to determine the fluorine abundance in a sample of 49 nearby, bright K-giants for which we previously have determined the stellar parameters as well as alpha abundances homogeneously from optical high-resolution spectra. The fluorine abundance is determined from a 2.3 $\mu$m HF molecular line observed with the spectrometer Phoenix.   We compare the fluorine abundances with those of alpha elements mainly produced in type II supernovae and find that fluorine and the alpha-elements do not evolve in lock-step, ruling out type II supernovae as the dominating producers of fluorine in the Solar neighborhood.   Furthermore, we find a secondary behavior of fluorine with respect to oxygen, which is another evidence against the type II supernovae playing a large role in the production of fluorine in the Solar neighborhood. This secondary behavior of fluorine will put new constraints on stellar models of the other two suggested production sites: Asymptotic Giant Branch stars and Wolf-Rayet stars.
The IceCube neutrino telescope monitors one cubic kilometer of deep Antarctic ice by detecting Cherenkov photons emitted from charged secondaries produced when neutrinos interact in the ice. The geometry of the detector, which comprises a lattice of 5160 photomultipliers, is optimized for the detection of neutrinos above 100 GeV. However, at subfreezing ice temperatures, dark noise rates are low enough that a high flux of MeV neutrinos streaming through the detector may be recognized by a collective rate enhancement in all photomultipliers. This method can be used to search for the signal of core collapse supernovae, providing sensitivity competitive to Mton neutrino detectors to a supernova in our Galaxy. An online data acquisition system dedicated to supernova detection has been running for several years, but its shortcomings include limited sampling frequency and the fact that the burst energy and direction cannot be reconstructed. A recently developed offline data acquisition system allows IceCube to buffer all registered photons in the detector in case of an alert with low probability to be erroneous. By analyzing such data offline, a precision determination of the burst onset time and the characteristics of rapidly varying fluxes, as well as estimates of the average neutrino energies may be obtained. For supernovae ending in a black hole, the IceCube data can also be used to determine the direction of the burst.
We discuss a specific population of galactic PeVatrons which may be the main source of the galactic cosmic-ray (CR) component well above PeV energies. Supernovae in compact clusters of massive stars are proposed as powerful sources of CRs, neutrinos, and gamma-ray emission. Numerical simulations of non-linear Fermi acceleration at converging shock flows have revealed that these accelerators can provide very hard spectra of protons up to $10^{16}-10^{17}$ eV which is well above the "knee" in the all-particle CR spectrum at about $3\times10^{15}$ eV. We suggest that known supernova remnants interacting with stellar winds in the compact clusters of young massive stars Westerlund I and Cl*1806-20 can be associated with the sources of the TeV gamma-ray emission detected by H.E.S.S. and may be responsible for a fraction of the high-energy neutrinos detected with the IceCube observatory. A recent CR composition measurement with the LOFAR array has revealed a light-mass component possibly dominating the all-particle spectrum at energies around $10^{17}$ eV. Such a strong light component (mainly protons and helium) may require specific galactic CR sources such as supernovae interacting with compact clusters of massive stars in addition to isolated supernova remnants.
Nascent neutron stars with millisecond periods and magnetic fields in excess of $10^{16}$ Gauss can drive highly energetic and asymmetric explosions known as magnetar-powered supernovae. These exotic explosions are one theoretical interpretation for supernovae Ic-BL which are sometimes associated with long gamma-ray bursts. Twisted magnetic field lines extract the rotational energy of the neutron star and release it as a disk wind or a jet with energies greater than 10$^{52}$ erg over $\sim 20$ sec. What fractions of the energy of the central engine go into the wind and the jet remain unclear. We have performed two-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations of magnetar-powered supernovae (SNe) driven by disk winds and jets with the CASTRO code to investigate the effect of the central engine on nucleosynthetic yields, mixing, and light curves. We find that these explosions synthesize less than 0.05 Msun of Ni and that this mass is not very sensitive to central engine type. The morphology of the explosion can provide a powerful diagnostic of the properties of the central engine. In the absence of a circumstellar medium these events are not very luminous, with peak bolometric magnitudes $M_b \sim -16.5 $ due to low Ni production.
In recent years, the viability of the pair-instability supernova (PISN) scenario for explaining superluminous supernovae has all but disappeared except for a few slowly-evolving examples. However, PISN are not predicted to be superluminous throughout the bulk of their mass range. In fact, it is more likely that the first PISN we see (if we have not seen one already) will not be superluminous. Here, we present hydrodynamic simulations of PISNe for four stellar models with unique envelope properties spanning the PISN mass range. In addition, we compute synthetic light curves for comparison with current and future observations. We also investigate, in the context of our most massive model, the prospect of mixing in the supernova ejecta alleviating discrepancies between current PISN models and the remaining superluminous candidate events. To this end, we present the first published 3D hydrodynamic simulations of PISNe. After achieving convergence between 1D, 2D, and 3D simulations we examine mixing in the supernova ejecta and its affect on the bolometric light curve. We observe slight deviations from spherical symmetry which increase with the number of dimensions. We find no significant effects on the bolometric light curve, however we conclude that mixing between the silicon and oxygen rich layers caused by the Rayleigh-Taylor instability may affect spectra.
This paper presents one of the first environmental analyses of the locations of the class of `interacting transients', namely type IIn supernovae and supernova Impostors. We discuss the association of these transients with star formation, host galaxy type, metallicity, and the locations of each event within the respective host. Given the frequent assumption of very high mass progenitors for these explosions from various studies, most notably a direct progenitor detection, it is interesting to note the weak association of these subtypes with star formation as traced by H{\alpha} emission, particularly in comparison with type Ic supernovae, which trace the H{\alpha} emission and are thought to arise from high mass progenitors. The radial distributions of these transients compared to type Ic supernovae are also very different. This provides evidence for the growing hypothesis that these `interacting transients' are in fact comprised of a variety of progenitor systems. The events contained within this sample are discussed in detail, where information in the literature exists, and compared to the environmental data provided. Impostors are found to split into two main classes, in terms of environment: SN2008S-like Impostors fall on regions of zero H{\alpha} emission, whereas {\eta}-Carina-like Impostors all fall on regions with positive H{\alpha} emission. We also find indications that the Impostor class originate from lower metallicity environments than type IIn, Ic and IIP SNe.
The most iron-deficient stars in the Milky Way provide important observational constraints on the nature of astrophysical objects that have enriched the primordial gas with heavy elements from which these stars were formed. Among them, the recently discovered iron-deficient star SMSS J031300.36-670839.3 shows a remarkable chemical composition with non-detection of iron ([Fe/H]$<-7.1$) and large enhancement of carbon and magnesium relative to calcium. We investigate the supernova yields of metal-free (Population III) stars to interpret the observed abundance pattern for this star. We report that the high [C/Ca] and [C/Mg] ratios and upper limits determined for other elemental abundances are well reproduced with the yields of core-collapse supernovae (that have normal kinetic energies of explosion $E$ of $E_{51}=E/10^{51}$erg$=1$) or hypernovae ($E_{51}\geq 10$) of the Population III 25$M_{\odot}$ or 40$M_{\odot}$ stars. The best-fit model assumes that the explosion of the Population III progenitor undergoes extensive matter mixing and fallback, leaving behind a black hole remnant. In these models, Ca is produced by static/explosive O burning and incomplete Si burning in the Population III supernova/hypernova, in contrast to the suggestion that Ca is originated from the hot CNO cycle during the presupernova evolution. Among the five most iron-poor stars with [Fe/H]$<-4.5$, four carbon-enhanced stars are consistent with the faint supernova models with the ejected mass of $^{56}$Ni less than 10$^{-3}M_{\odot}$.
A key test of the supernova triggering and injection hypothesis for the origin of the solar system's short-lived radioisotopes is to reproduce the inferred initial abundances of these isotopes. We present here the most detailed models to date of the shock wave triggering and injection process, where shock waves with varied properties strike fully three dimensional, rotating, dense cloud cores. The models are calculated with the FLASH adaptive mesh hydrodynamics code. Three different outcomes can result: triggered collapse leading to fragmentation into a multiple protostar system; triggered collapse leading to a single protostar embedded in a protostellar disk; or failure to undergo dynamic collapse. Shock wave material is injected into the collapsing clouds through Rayleigh-Taylor fingers, resulting in initially inhomogeneous distributions in the protostars and protostellar disks. Cloud rotation about an axis aligned with the shock propagation direction does not increase the injection efficiency appreciably, as the shock parameters were chosen to be optimal for injection even in the absence of rotation. For a shock wave from a core-collapse supernova, the dilution factors for supernova material are in the range of $\sim 10^{-4}$ to $\sim 3 \times 10^{-4}$, in agreement with recent laboratory estimates of the required amount of dilution for $^{60}$Fe and $^{26}$Al. We conclude that a type II supernova remains as a promising candidate for synthesizing the solar system's short-lived radioisotopes shortly before their injection into the presolar cloud core by the supernova's remnant shock wave.
Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) are well-known for their use in the measurement of cosmological distances, but our continuing lack of concrete knowledge about their progenitor stars is both a matter of debate and a source of systematic error. In our attempts to answer this question, we presented unambiguous evidence that LMC SNR 0509-67.5, the remnant of an SN Ia that exploded in the Large Magellanic Cloud 400 +/- 50 years ago, did not have any point sources (stars) near the site of the original supernova explosion, from which we concluded that this particular supernova must have had a progenitor system consisting of two white dwarfs (Schaefer & Pagnotta 2012). There is, however, evidence of nebulosity near the center of the remnant, which could have been left over detritus from the less massive WD, or could have been a background galaxy unrelated to the supernova explosion. We obtained long-slit spectra of the central nebulous region using GMOS on Gemini South to determine which of these two possibilities is correct. The spectra show H-alpha emission at a redshift of z = 0.031, which implies that the nebulosity in the center of LMC SNR 0509-67.5 is a background galaxy, unrelated to the supernova.
Cao et al. (2013) reported a possible progenitor detection for the type Ib supernovae iPTF13bvn for the first time. We find that the progenitor is in fact brighter than the magnitudes previously reported by approximately 0.7 to 0.2 mag with a larger error in the bluer filters. We compare our new magnitudes to our large set of binary evolution models and find that many binary models with initial masses in the range of 10 to 20M(Sun) match this new photometry and other constraints suggested from analysing the supernova. In addition these lower mass stars retain more helium at the end of the model evolution indicating that they are likely to be observed as type Ib supernovae rather than their more massive, Wolf-Rayet counter parts. We are able to rule out typical Wolf-Rayet models as the progenitor because their ejecta masses are too high and they do not fit the observed SED unless they have a massive companion which is the observed source at the supernova location. Therefore only late-time observations of the location will truly confirm if the progenitor was a helium giant and not a Wolf-Rayet star.
The recent discovery that the Fe-K line luminosities and energy centroids observed in nearby SNRs are a strong discriminant of both progenitor type and circumstellar environment has implications for our understanding of supernova progenitor evolution. Using models for the chemical composition of core-collapse supernova ejecta, we model the dynamics and thermal X-ray emission from shocked ejecta and circumstellar material, modeled as an $r^{-2}$ wind, to ages of 3000 years. We compare the X-ray spectra expected from these models to observations made with the Suzaku satellite. We also model the dynamics and X-ray emission from Type Ia progenitor models. We find a clear distinction in Fe-K line energy centroid between core-collapse and Type Ia models. The core-collapse supernova models predict higher Fe-K line centroid energies than the Type Ia models, in agreement with observations. We argue that the higher line centroids are a consequence of the increased densities found in the circumstellar environment created by the expansion of the slow-moving wind from the massive progenitors.
Type Ia supernovae are destructive explosions of carbon oxygen white dwarfs. Although they are used empirically to measure cosmological distances, the nature of their progenitors remains mysterious, One of the leading progenitor models, called the single degenerate channel, hypothesizes that a white dwarf accretes matter from a companion star and the resulting increase in its central pressure and temperature ignites thermonuclear explosion. Here we report observations of strong but declining ultraviolet emission from a Type Ia supernova within four days of its explosion. This emission is consistent with theoretical expectations of collision between material ejected by the supernova and a companion star, and therefore provides evidence that some Type Ia supernovae arise from the single degenerate channel.
The progenitors of hydrogen-poor core-collapse supernovae (SNe) of types Ib, Ic and IIb are believed to have shed their outer hydrogen envelopes either by extremely strong stellar winds, characteristic of classical Wolf-Rayet stars, or by binary interaction with a close companion star. The exact nature of the progenitors and the relative importance of these processes are still open questions. One relatively unexplored method to constrain the progenitors is to search for high-mass X-ray binaries (HMXB) at SN locations in pre-explosion X-ray observations. In a HMXB, one star has already exploded as a core-collapse SN, producing a neutron star or a stellar-mass black hole. It is likely that the second star in the system will also explode as a supernova, which should cause a detectable long-term change in the system's X-ray luminosity. In particular, a pre-explosion detection of a HMXB coincident with a SN could be informative about the progenitor's nature. In this paper we analyze pre-explosion ACIS observations of 18 nearby type Ib, Ic and IIb supernovae from the Chandra X-ray observatory public archive. Two sources that could potentially be associated with the supernova are identified in the sample. Additionally we make similar post-explosion measurements for 46 SNe. Although our modelling indicates that progenitor systems with compact binary companions are probably quite rare, studies of this type can in the future provide more stringent constraints as the number of discovered nearby SNe and suitable pre-explosion X-ray data are both increasing.
Nonstandard interactions (NSI) of neutrinos with matter can significantly alter neutrino flavor evolution in supernovae with the potential to impact explosion dynamics, nucleosynthesis, and the neutrinos signal. In this paper, we explore, both numerically and analytically, the landscape of neutrino flavor transformation effects in supernovae due to NSI and find a new, heretofore unseen transformation processes can occur. These new transformations can take place with NSI strengths well below current experimental limits. Within a broad swath of NSI parameter space, we observe symmetric and standard matter-neutrino resonances for supernovae neutrinos, a transformation effect previously only seen in compact object merger scenarios; in another region of the parameter space we find the NSI can induce neutrino collective effects in scenarios where none would appear with only the standard case of neutrino oscillation physics; and in a third region the NSI can lead to the disappearance of the high density Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein resonance. Using a variety of analytical tools, we are able to describe quantitatively the numerical results allowing us to partition the NSI parameter according to the transformation processes observed. Our results indicate nonstandard interactions of supernova neutrinos provide a sensitive probe of beyond the Standard Model physics complementary to present and future terrestrial experiments.
Extremely metal poor stars have been the focus of much recent attention owing to the expectation that their chemical abundances can shed light on the metal and dust yields of the earliest supernovae. We present our most realistic simulation to date of the astrophysical pathway to the first metal enriched stars. We simulate the radiative and supernova hydrodynamic feedback of a $60\,M_\odot$ Population III star starting from cosmological initial conditions realizing Gaussian density fluctuations. We follow the gravitational hydrodynamics of the supernova remnant at high spatial resolution through its freely-expanding, adiabatic, and radiative phases, until gas, now metal-enriched, has resumed runaway gravitational collapse. Our findings are surprising: while the Population III progenitor exploded with a low energy of $10^{51}\,\text{erg}$ and injected an ample metal mass of $6\,M_\odot$, the first cloud to collapse after the supernova explosion is a dense surviving primordial cloud on which the supernova blastwave deposited metals only superficially, in a thin, unresolved layer. The first metal-enriched stars can form at a very low metallicity, of only $2-5\times10^{-4}\,Z_\odot$, and can inherit the parent cloud's highly elliptical, radially extended orbit in the dark matter gravitational potential.
The spatial distribution of the metals residing in the intra-cluster medium (ICM) of galaxy clusters records all the information on a cluster's nucleosynthesis and chemical enrichment history. We present measurements from a total of 1.2 Ms Suzaku XIS and 72 ks Chandra observations of the cool-core galaxy cluster Abell 3112 out its virial radius (~ 1470 kpc). We find that the ratio of the observed supernova type Ia explosions to the total supernova explosions has a uniform distribution at a level of 12-16% out to the cluster's virial radius. The observed fraction of type Ia supernova explosions is in agreement with the corresponding fraction found in our Galaxy and the chemical enrichment of our Galaxy. The non-varying supernova enrichment suggests that the ICM in cluster outskirts was enriched by metals at an early stage before the cluster itself was formed during the period of intense star formation activity. Additionally, we find that the 2D delayed detonation model CDDT produces significantly worse fits to the X-ray spectra compared to simple 1D W7 models. This is due to the relative overestimate of Si, and underestimate of Mg, in these models with respect to the measured abundances.
The Milky Way Galaxy glows with the soft gamma ray emission resulting from the annihilation of $\sim 5 \times 10^{43}$ electron-positron pairs every second. The origin of this vast quantity of antimatter and the peculiar morphology of the 511keV gamma ray line resulting from this annihilation have been the subject of debate for almost half a century. Most obvious positron sources are associated with star forming regions and cannot explain the rate of positron annihilation in the Galactic bulge, which last saw star formation some $10\,\mathrm{Gyr}$ ago, or else violate stringent constraints on the positron injection energy. Radioactive decay of elements formed in core collapse supernovae (CCSNe) and normal Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) could supply positrons matching the injection energy constraints but the distribution of such potential sources does not replicate the required morphology. We show that a single class of peculiar thermonuclear supernova - SN1991bg-like supernovae (SNe 91bg) - can supply the number and distribution of positrons we see annihilating in the Galaxy through the decay of $^{44}$Ti synthesised in these events. Such $^{44}$Ti production simultaneously addresses the observed abundance of $^{44}$Ca, the $^{44}$Ti decay product, in solar system material.
Galaxy evolution and star formation are two multi-scale problems tightly linked to each other. To understand the interstellar cycle, which triggers galaxy evolution, it is necessary to describe simultaneously the large-scale evolution widely induced by the feedback processes and the details of the gas dynamics that controls the star formation process through gravitational collapse. We perform a set of three-dimensional high-resolution numerical simulations of a turbulent, self-gravitating and magnetized interstellar medium within a $1\ \mathrm{kpc}$ stratified box with supernova feedback correlated with star-forming regions. In particular, we focus on the role played by the magnetic field and the feedback on the galactic vertical structure, the star formation rate (SFR) and the flow dynamics. For this purpose we vary their respective intensities. We extract properties of the dense clouds arising from the turbulent motions and compute power spectra of various quantities. Using a distribution of supernovae sufficiently correlated with the dense gas, we find that supernova explosions can reproduce the observed SFR, particularly if the magnetic field is on the order of a few $\mu G$. The vertical structure, which results from a dynamical and an energy equilibrium is well reproduced by a simple analytical model, which allows us to estimate the coupling between the gas and the supernovae. We found the coupling to be rather low and on the order of 1.5$\%$. Strong magnetic fields may help to increase this coupling by a factor of about 2-3. To characterize the flow we compute the power spectra of various quantities in 3D but also in 2D in order to account for the stratification of the galactic disc.
The acceleration times of the highest-energy particles which emit gamma-rays in young and middle-age SNRs are comparable with SNR age. If the number of particles starting acceleration was varying during early times after the supernova explosion then this variation should be reflected in the shape of the gamma-ray spectrum. We use the solution of the non-stationary equation for particle acceleration in order to analyze this effect. As a test case, we apply our method to describe gamma-rays from IC443. As a proxy of the IC443 parent supernova we consider SN1987A. First, we infer the time dependence of injection efficiency from evolution of the radio spectral index in SN1987A. Then, we use the inferred injection behavior to fit the gamma-ray spectrum of IC443. We show that the break in the proton spectrum needed to explain the gamma-ray emission is a natural consequence of the early variation of the cosmic ray injection, and that the very-high energy gamma-rays originate from particles which began acceleration during the first months after the supernova explosion. We conclude that the shape of the gamma-ray spectrum observed today in SNRs critically depends on the time variation of the cosmic ray injection process in the immediate post explosion phases. With the same model, we estimate also the possibility in the future to detect gamma-rays from SN 1987A.
We discuss the possibility of obtaining Fast Radio Bursts (FRBs) from the interior of supernovae, in particular SN 1986J. Young neutron stars are involved in many of the possible scenarios for the origin of FRBs, and it has been suggested that the high dispersion measures observed in FRBs might be produced by the ionized material in the ejecta of associated supernovae. Using VLA and VLBI measurements of the Type IIn SN 1986J, which has a central compact component not so far seen in other supernovae, we can directly observe for the first time radio signals which originate in the interior of a young (~30 yr old) supernova. We show that at age 30 yr, any FRB signal at ~1 GHz would still be largely absorbed by the ejecta. By the time the ejecta have expanded so that a 1-GHz signal would be visible, the internal dispersion measure due to the SN ejecta would be below the values typically seen for FRBs. The high dispersion measures seen for the FRBs detected so far could of course be due to propagation through the intergalactic medium provided that the FRBs are at distances much larger than that of SN 1986J, which is 10 Mpc. We conclude that if FRBs originate in Type II SNe/SNRs, they would likely not become visible till 60 ~ 200 yr after the SN explosion.
Type Ia supernovae are generally agreed to arise from thermonuclear explosions of carbon-oxygen white dwarfs. The actual path to explosion, however, remains elusive, with numerous plausible parent systems and explosion mechanisms suggested. Observationally, type Ia supernovae have multiple subclasses, distinguished by their lightcurves and spectra. This raises the question whether these reflect that multiple mechanisms occur in nature, or instead that explosions have a large but continuous range of physical properties. We revisit the idea that normal and 91bg-like supernovae can be understood as part of a spectral sequence, in which changes in temperature dominate. Specifically, we find that a single ejecta structure is sufficient to provide reasonable fits of both the normal type Ia supernova SN~2011fe and the 91bg-like SN~2005bl, provided that the luminosity and thus temperature of the ejecta are adjusted appropriately. This suggests that the outer layers of the ejecta are similar, thus providing some support of a common explosion mechanism. Our spectral sequence also helps to shed light on the conditions under which carbon can be detected in pre-maximum SN~Ia spectra -- we find that emission from iron can "fill in" the carbon trough in cool SN~Ia. This may indicate that the outer layers of the ejecta of events in which carbon is detected are relatively metal poor compared to events where carbon is not detected.
Supernova remnants (SNRs) are powerful particle accelerators. As a supernova (SN) blast wave propagates through the circumstellar medium (CSM), electrons and protons scatter across the shock and gain energy by entrapment in the magnetic field. The accelerated particles generate further magnetic field fluctuations and local amplification, leading to cosmic ray production. The wealth of data from Supernova 1987A is providing a template of the SN-CSM interaction, and an important guide to the radio detection and identification of core-collapse SNe based on their spectral properties. Thirty years after the explosion, radio observations of SNR 1987A span from 70 MHz to 700 GHz. We review extensive observing campaigns with the Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) and the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), and follow-ups with other radio telescopes. Observations across the radio spectrum indicate rapid changes in the remnant morphology, while current ATCA and ALMA observations show that the SNR has entered a new evolutionary phase.
I outline the dynamical evolution of the shell remnants of supernovae (SNRs), from initial interaction of supernova ejecta with circumstellar material (CSM) through to the final dissolution of the remnant into the interstellar medium (ISM). Supernova ejecta drive a blast wave through any CSM from the progenitor system; as material is swept up, a reverse shock forms in the ejecta, reheating them. This ejecta-driven phase lasts until ten or more times the ejected mass is swept up, and the remnant approaches the Sedov or self-similar evolutionary phase. The evolution up to this time is approximately adiabatic. Eventually, as the blast wave slows, the remnant age approaches the cooling time for immediate post-shock gas, and the shock becomes radiative and highly compressive. Eventually the shock speed drops below the local ISM sound speed and the remnant dissipates. I then review the various processes by which remnants radiate. At early times, during the adiabatic phases, thermal X-rays and nonthermal radio, X-ray, and gamma-ray emission dominate, while optical emission is faint and confined to a few strong lines of hydrogen and perhaps helium. Once the shock is radiative, prominent optical and infrared emission is produced. Young remnants are profoundly affected by interaction with often anisotropic CSM, while even mature remnants can still show evidence of ejecta.
In this paper, we investigate whether it is possible to determine the neutrino mass hierarchy via a high-statistics and real-time observation of supernova neutrinos with short-time characteristics. The essential idea is to utilize distinct times-of-flight for different neutrino mass eigenstates from a core-collapse supernova to the Earth, which may significantly change the time distribution of neutrino events in the future huge water-Cherenkov and liquid-scintillator detectors. For illustration, we consider two different scenarios. The first case is the neutronization burst of $\nu^{}_e$ emitted in the first tens of milliseconds of a core-collapse supernova, while the second case is the black hole formation during the accretion phase for which neutrino signals are expected to be abruptly terminated. In the latter scenario, it turns out only when the supernova is at a distance of a few Mpc and the fiducial mass of the detector is at the level of gigaton, might we be able to discriminate between normal and inverted neutrino mass hierarchies. In the former scenario, the probability for such a discrimination is even less due to a poor statistics.
In the first 10 seconds of a core-collapse supernova, almost all of its progenitor's gravitational potential, O(10$^{53}$~ergs), is carried away in the form of neutrinos. These neutrinos, with O(10~MeV) kinetic energy, can interact via coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering (CE$\nu$NS) depositing O(1~keV) in detectors. In this work, we demonstrate that low-background dark matter detectors, such as LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ), optimized for detecting low-energy depositions, are capable of detecting these neutrino interactions. For instance, a 27~M$_\odot$ supernova at 10~kpc is expected to produce $\sim$350 neutrino interactions in the 7-tonne liquid xenon active volume of LZ. Based on the LS220 EoS neutrino flux model for a SN, the Noble Element Simulation Technique (NEST), and predicted CE$\nu$NS cross-sections for xenon, to study energy deposition and detection of SN neutrinos in LZ. We simulate the response of the LZ data acquisition system (DAQ) and demonstrate its capability and limitations in handling this interaction rate. We present an overview of the LZ detector, focusing on the benefits of liquid xenon for supernova neutrino detection. We discuss energy deposition and detector response simulations and their results. We present an analysis technique to reconstruct the total number of neutrinos and the time of the supernova core bounce.
Observations of high-redshift Type Ia supernovae (SNe~Ia) are used to study the cosmic transparency at optical wavelengths. Assuming a flat $\Lambda$CDM cosmological model based on BAO and CMB results, redshift dependent deviations of SN~Ia distances are used to constrain mechanisms that would dim light. The analysis is based on the most recent Pantheon SN compilation, for which there is a $0.03\pm0.01 {\textrm \,(\rm stat)}$ mag discrepancy in the distant supernova distance moduli relative to the $\Lambda$CDM model anchored by supernovae at $z<0.05$. While there are known systematic uncertainties that combined could explain the observed offset, here we entertain the possibility that the discrepancy may instead be explained by scattering of supernova light in the intergalactic medium (IGM). We focus on two effects: Compton scattering by free electrons and extinction by dust in the IGM. We find that if the discrepancy is due entirely to dimming by dust, the measurements can be modeled with a cosmic dust density $\Omega_{\rm IGM}^{\rm dust} = 8 \cdot 10^{-5} (1+z)^{-1}$, corresponding to an average attenuation of $2\cdot 10^{-5}$ mag Mpc$^{-1}$ in V-band. Forthcoming SN~Ia studies may provide a definitive measurement of the IGM dust properties, while still providing an unbiased estimate of cosmological parameters by introducing additional parameters in the global fits to the observations.
For a suite of fourteen core-collapse models during the dynamical first second after bounce, we calculate the detailed neutrino "light" curves expected in the underground neutrino observatories Super-Kamiokande, DUNE, JUNO, and IceCube. These results are given as a function of neutrino-oscillation modality (normal or inverted hierarchy) and progenitor mass (specifically, post-bounce accretion history), and illuminate the differences between the light curves for 1D (spherical) models that don't explode with the corresponding 2D (axisymmetric) models that do. We are able to identify clear signatures of explosion (or non-explosion), the post-bounce accretion phase, and the accretion of the silicon/oxygen interface. In addition, we are able to estimate the supernova detection ranges for various physical diagnostics and the distances out to which various temporal features embedded in the light curves might be discerned. We find that the progenitor mass density profile and supernova dynamics during the dynamical explosion stage should be identifiable for a supernova throughout most of the galaxy in all the facilities studied and that detection by any one of them, but in particular more than one in concert, will speak volumes about the internal dynamics of supernovae.
Recent studies of fast radio bursts (FRBs) have led to many theories associating them with young neutron stars. If this is the case, then the presence of supernova ejecta and stellar winds provide a changing dispersion measure (DM) and rotation measure (RM) that can potentially be probes of the environments of FRB progenitors. Here we summarize the scalings for the DM and RM in the cases of a constant density ambient medium and of a progenitor stellar wind. Since the amount of ionized material is controlled by the dynamics of the reverse shock, we find the DM changes more slowly than in previous simpler work, which simply assumed a constant ionization fraction. Furthermore, the DM can be constant or even increasing as the supernova remnant sweeps up material, arguing that a young neutron star hypothesis for FRBs is not ruled out if the DM is not decreasing over repeated bursts. The combined DM and RM measurements for the repeating FRB 121102 are consistent with supernova ejecta with an age of $\sim10^2-10^3\,{\rm yrs}$ expanding into a high density ($\sim100\,{\rm cm^{-3}}$) interstellar medium. This naturally explains its relatively constant DM over many years as well. Other FRBs with much lower RMs may indicate that they are especially young supernovae in wind environments or that their DMs are largely from the intergalactic medium. We therefore caution about inferring magnetic fields from simply by dividing an RM by DM, because these quantities could originate from distinct regions along the path an FRB propagates.
With the recent progresses on the Type II supernovae, we attempt to investigate whether there does exist new physics beyond the standard cosmological paradigm, i.e., the cosmological constant $\Lambda$ plus cold dark matter ($\Lambda$CDM). Constraining four alternative cosmological models with a data combination of currently available Type II supernovae calibrated by the standard color method, Type Ia supernovae, baryon acoustic oscillations, cosmic microwave background and cosmic chronometers, at the $1\sigma$ confidence level, we find that: (i) a spatially flat universe is supported for the non-flat $\Lambda$CDM model; (ii) the constrained equation of state of dark energy $\omega$ is consistent with the $\Lambda$CDM hypothesis for the $\omega$CDM model where $\omega$ is a free parameter; (iii) for the decaying vacuum model, there is no evidence of interaction between dark matter and dark energy in the dark sector of the universe; (iv) there is also no hint of dynamical dark energy for the dark energy density-parametrization scenario. It is very obvious that a larger Type II supernovae sample is required, if we expect to draw definitive conclusions about the formation and evolution of the universe.
It has recently been demonstrated analytically that the two-point correlation function for pairs of neutrinos may contain information about the size of the proto-neutron star formed in a Galactic core-collapse supernova. The information about the size of the source emerges via the neutrino equivalent of intensity interferometry originally used by Hanbury-Brown and Twiss with photons to measure the radii of stars. However the analytic demonstration of neutrino intensity interferometry with supernova neutrinos made a number of approximations: that the two neutrinos had equal energies, the neutrinos were emitted at simultaneous times from two points and were detected simultaneously at two detection points that formed a plane with the emission points. These approximations need to be relaxed in order to better determine the feasibility of neutrino intensity interferometry for supernovae neutrinos in a more realistic scenario. In this paper we further investigate the feasibility of intensity interferometry for supernova neutrinos by relaxing all the approximations made in the earlier study. We find that, while relaxing any one assumption reduces the correlation signal, the relaxation of the assumption of equal times of detection is by far the largest detrimental factor. For neutrino energies of order $\sim$15 MeV and a supernova distance of L = 10 kpc, we show that in order to observe the interference pattern in the two-point correlation function of the neutrino pairs, the timing resolution of a detector needs to be on the order of $\lesssim 10^{-21}\;{\rm s}$ if the initial neutrino wave packet has a size of $\sigma_x \sim 10^{-11}\;{\rm cm}$.
Context: It has been suggested that some supernovae (SNe) may be powered by a magnetar formed at the moment of the explosion. While this scenario has mostly been applied to hydrogen-free events, it may be possible also for hydrogen-rich objects. Aims: We explore the effect of including a magnetar on the light curves of supernovae with H-rich progenitors. Methods: We have applied a version of our one-dimensional LTE radiation hydrodynamics code that takes into account the relativistic motion of the ejecta caused by the extra energy provided by the magnetar. For a fixed red supergiant (RSG) progenitor, we have obtained a set of light curves that corresponds to different values of the magnetar initial rotation energy and the spin-down timescale. The model is applied to SN~2004em and OGLE-2014-SN-073, two peculiar Type II SNe with long-rising SN1987A-like light curves, although with much larger luminosities. Results: The presence of a plateau phase in either normal or superluminous supernovae is one possible outcome, even if a magnetar is continuously injecting energy into the ejecta.In other cases, the light curve shows a peak but not a plateau. Also, there are intermediate events with a first peak followed by a slow decline and a late break of the declining slope. Our models show that bright and long rising morphologies are possible even assuming RSG structures. Conclusions: A large number of supernova discoveries per year reveal unexpected new types of explosions. According to our results, SLSNe II-P are to be expected, as well as a variety of light curve morphologies that can all be possible signs of a newly born magnetar.
We present the distributions of elemental abundance ratios using chemodynamical simulations which include four different neutron capture processes: magneto-rotational supernovae, neutron star mergers, neutrino driven winds, and electron capture supernovae. We examine both simple isolated dwarf disc galaxies and cosmological zoom-in simulations of Milky Way-type galaxies, and compare the [Eu/Fe] and [Eu/{\alpha}] evolution with recent observations, including the HERMES-GALAH survey. We find that neither electron-capture supernovae or neutrino-driven winds are able to adequately produce heavy neutron-capture elements such as Eu in quantities to match observations. Both neutron-star mergers and magneto-rotational supernovae are able to produce these elements in sufficient quantities. Additionally, we find that the scatter in [Eu/Fe] and [Eu/{\alpha}] at low metallicity ([Fe/H] < -1) and the [Eu/(Fe, {\alpha})] against [Fe/H] gradient of the data at high metallicity ([Fe/H] > -1) are both potential indicators of the dominant r-process site. Using the distribution in [Eu/(Fe, {\alpha}] - [Fe/H] we predict that neutron star mergers alone are unable to explain the observed Eu abundances, but may be able to together with magneto-rotational supernovae.
The progenitor stars of core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) are asymmetrically fluctuating due to turbulent convections in the late stages of their lives. The progenitor asymmetry at the pre-supernova stage has recently caught the attention as a new ingredient to facilitate shock revival in the delayed neutrino-heating mechanism. In this paper, we investigate the importance of the progenitor asymmetries to shock revival with a semi-analytical approach. Free parameters were chosen such that the time evolution of shock radii and mass accretion rates are compatible with the results of detailed numerical simulations of CCSNe in spherical symmetry. We first estimate the amplitude of asymmetries required for the shock revival by the impulsive change of pre-shock flows in the context of neutrino heating mechanism, and then convert the amplitude to the corresponding amplitude in the pre-supernova phase by taking into account the growth of asymmetries during infall. We apply our model to various types of progenitors and find that the requisite amplitude of pre-supernova asymmetry is roughly three times larger than the prediction by current stellar evolution models unless other additional physical ingredients such as multi-dimensional fluid instabilities and turbulent convections in post-shock flows aid shock revival. We thus conclude that progenitor asymmetries can not trigger the shock revival by the impulsive way but rather play a supplementary role in reality.
Only three extragalactic supernovae have been detected at late times at millimeter wavelengths: SN 1987A, SN 1978K, and SN 1996cr. SN 1978K is a remarkably luminous Type IIn supernova that remains bright at all wavelengths 40 years after its explosion. Here we present Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) observations taken in 2016 using Bands 3, 4, 6, and 7 that show a steepening in the spectrum. An absorbed single power law model broadly fits all the radio and millimeter observations, but would require significant chromatic variability. Alternatively, a broken power law fits the radio-millimeter spectrum: this can be explained using an ultra-relativistic spherical blast wave in a wind scaling with a cooling break, as in a gamma-ray burst afterglow. Using updated Australia Telescope Compact Array (ATCA) light curves, we show the non-thermal radio continuum continues to decay as $t^{-1.53}$; in the fireball model, this independently defines the power law indices found in the radio-millimeter spectrum. Supernovae such as SN 1978K might be important contributors to the Universal dust budget: only SN 1978K was detected in a search for warm dust in supernovae in the transitional phase (age 10-100 years). Using Spitzer Space Telescope observations, we show that at least some of this dust emission has been decaying rapidly as $t^{-2.45}$ over the past decade, suggesting it is being destroyed. Depending on the modeling of the synchrotron emission, the ALMA observations suggest there may be emission from a cold dust component.
We investigate effects of energetic pulsar wind nebulae (PWNe) on dust formation and evolution. Dust emission has been observed in many supernova remnants that also have neutron stars as compact remnants. We study the dependence of dust formation time and size on properties of the ejecta and central pulsar. We find that a pulsar with an initial spin period $P \sim 1\mbox{-}10\,\rm ms$ and a dipole magnetic field $B \sim 10^{12\mbox{-}15}\,\rm G$ can either accelerate or delay dust formation, with a timescale of several months to over ten years, and reduce the average size of dust by a factor of $\sim$ 10 or more compared to the non-pulsar case. We also find that infrared dust emission may be detectable in typical superluminous supernovae out to $\sim$ 100-1000 Mpc in 2-5 years after the explosion, although this depends sensitively on the spectral index of nonthermal emission from the nebula. We discuss implications to previous supernova observations. Some discrepancies between dust formation models and observations, such as the formation time in SN1987A or the dust size in the Crab Nebula, could be explained by the influence of a pulsar, and knowledge of the dust emission will be important for future ALMA observations of superluminous supernovae.
The dense neutrino medium in a core-collapse supernova or a neutron-star merger event can experience fast flavor conversions on time/distance scales that are much smaller than those of vacuum oscillations. It is believed that fast neutrino flavor transformation occurs in the region where the angular distributions of $\nu_e$ and $\bar\nu_e$ cross each other. We present the first study of this crossing phenomenon and the fast neutrino flavor conversions in multidimensional (multi-D) supernova models. We examine the neutrino distributions obtained by solving the Boltzmann transport equation for several fixed profiles which are representative snapshots taken from separate 2D and 3D supernova simulations with an $11.2 M_\odot$ progenitor model. Our research shows that the spherically asymmetric patterns of the $\nu_e$ and $\bar\nu_e$ fluxes in multi-D models can assist the appearance of the crossing between the $\nu_e$ and $\bar\nu_e$ angular distributions. In the models that we have studied, there exist unstable neutrino oscillation modes in and beyond the neutrino decoupling region which have amplitude growth rates as large as an $e$-fold per nanosecond. This finding can have important consequences for the explosion mechanism, nucleosynthesis, and neutrino signals of core-collapse supernovae.
This work determines the degree to which a standard Lambda-CDM analysis based on type Ia supernovae can identify deviations from a cosmological constant in the form of a redshift-dependent dark energy equation of state w(z). We introduce and apply a novel random curve generator to simulate instances of w(z) from constraint families with increasing distinction from a cosmological constant. After producing a series of mock catalogs of binned type Ia supernovae corresponding to each w(z) curve, we perform a standard Lambda-CDM analysis to estimate the corresponding posterior densities of the absolute magnitude of type Ia supernovae, the present-day matter density, and the equation of state parameter. Using the Kullback-Leibler divergence between posterior densities as a difference measure, we demonstrate that a standard type Ia supernova cosmology analysis has limited sensitivity to extensive redshift dependencies of the dark energy equation of state. In addition, we report that larger redshift-dependent departures from a cosmological constant do not necessarily manifest easier-detectable incompatibilities with the Lambda-CDM model. Our results suggest that physics beyond the standard model may simply be hidden in plain sight.
We introduce SuperNNova, an open source supernova photometric classification framework which leverages recent advances in deep neural networks. Our core algorithm is a recurrent neural network (RNN) that is trained to classify light-curves using photometric information only. Additional information such as host-galaxy redshift can be incorporated to improve performance. We evaluate our framework using realistic supernovae simulations that include survey detection. We show that our method, for the type Ia vs. non Ia supernovae classification problem, reaches accuracies greater than 96.92 +- 0.09 without any redshift information and up to 99.55 +- 0.06 when redshift, either photometric or spectroscopic, is available. Further, we show that our method attains unprecedented performance for classification of incomplete light-curves, reaching accuracies >86.4 +- 0.1 (>93.5 +- 0.8) without host-galaxy redshift (with redshift information) two days before maximum light. In contrast with previous methods, there is no need for time-consuming feature engineering and we show that our method scales to very large datasets with a modest computing budget. In addition, we investigate often neglected pitfalls of machine learning algorithms. We show that commonly used algorithms suffer from poor calibration and overconfidence on out-of-distribution samples when applied to supernovae data. We devise extensive tests to estimate the robustness of classifiers and cast the learning procedure under a Bayesian light, demonstrating a much better handling of uncertainties. We study the benefits of Bayesian RNNs for SN Ia cosmology. Our code is open-sourced and available on https://github.com/supernnova/SuperNNova.
We present advances in modeling Type IIP supernovae using MESA for evolution to shock breakout coupled with STELLA for generating light and radial velocity curves. Explosion models and synthetic light curves can be used to translate observable properties of supernovae (such as the luminosity at day 50 and the duration of the plateau, as well as the observable quantity $ET$, defined as the time-weighted integrated luminosity that would have been generated if there was no ${\rm ^{56}Ni}$ in the ejecta) into families of explosions which produce the same light curve and velocities on the plateau. These predicted families of explosions provide a useful guide towards modeling observed SNe, and can constrain explosion properties when coupled with other observational or theoretical constraints. For an observed supernova with a measured ${\rm ^{56}Ni}$ mass, breaking the degeneracies within these families of explosions (ejecta mass, explosion energy, and progenitor radius) requires independent knowledge of one parameter. We expect the most common case to be a progenitor radius measurement for a nearby supernova. We show that ejecta velocities inferred from the Fe II$\lambda$ 5169 line measured during the majority of the plateau phase provide little additional information about explosion characteristics. Only during the initial shock cooling phase can photospheric velocity measurements potentially aid in unraveling light curve degeneracies.
Whether supernovae are a significant source of dust has been a long-standing debate. The large quantities of dust observed in high-redshift galaxies raise a fundamental question as to the origin of dust in the Universe since stars cannot have evolved to the AGB dust-producing phase in high-redshift galaxies. In contrast, supernovae occur within several millions of years after the onset of star formation. This white paper focuses on dust formation in supernova ejecta with US-Extremely Large Telescope (ELT) perspective during the era of JWST and LSST.
Peculiar velocities introduce correlations between supernova magnitudes, which implies that the supernova Hubble diagram residual contains valuable information on both the present matter power spectrum and its growth rate. In this paper, by a combination of brute-force exact computations of likelihoods and Fisher matrix analysis, we investigate how this estimation depends on different survey parameters such as covered area, depth, and duration. We show that, for a LSST-like survey, the same observing time provides the same cosmological information whether one observes a larger area, or a smaller area during more years. We also show that although the peculiar velocity information is peaked in the range $z \in [0, 0.2]$, there is yet plenty of information in $z \in [0.2, 0.5]$, and for very high supernova number densities there is even more information in the latter range. We conclude that, after 5 years, LSST could measure $\sigma_8$ with an uncertainty of 0.17 with the current strategy, and that this could be improved to 0.09 if the supernova completeness is improved to 20%. Moreover, we forecast results considering the extra parameter $\gamma$, and show that this creates a non-linear degeneracy with $\sigma_8$ that makes the Fisher matrix analysis inadequate. Finally, we discuss the possibility of achieving competitive results with the current Zwicky Transient Facility.
Non-standard neutrino self interactions (NSSI) could be stronger than Fermi interactions. We investigate the ability to constrain these four-neutrino interactions by their effect on the flux of neutrinos originating from a galactic supernova. In the dense medium of a core collapse supernova, these new self interactions can have a significant impact on neutrino oscillations, leading to changes at the flavor evolution and spectra level. We use simulations of the neutrino flux from a 13 solar mass, core collapse supernova at 10 kpc away, and numerically propagate these neutrinos through the stellar medium taking into account vacuum/MSW oscillations, SM $\nu-\nu$ scattering as well as $\nu-\nu$ interactions that arise from NSSI. We pass the resulting neutrino flux to a simulation of the future Hyper-Kamiokande detector to see what constraints on NSSI parameters are possible when the next galactic supernova becomes visible. We find that these constraints depend strongly on the neutrino mass hierarchy and if the NSSI is flavor-violating or preserving. Sensitivity to NSSI in the normal hierarchy (NH) at Hyper-K is limited by the experiment's ability to efficiently detect $\nu_{e}$, but deviations from no NSSI could be seen if the NSSI is particularly strong. In the inverted hierarchy (IH) scenario, Hyper-K can significantly improve constraints on flavor-violating NSSI down to $\mathcal{O}(10^{-1})G_{F}$.
It is generally believed that Type Ia supernovae are thermonuclear explosions of carbon-oxygen white dwarfs (WDs). However, there is currently no consensus regarding the events leading to the explosion. A binary WD (WD-WD) merger is a possible progenitor of Type Ia supernovae. Space-based gravitational wave (GW) detectors with great sensitivity in the decihertz range like DECIGO can observe WD-WD mergers directly. Therefore, access to the deci-Hz band of GWs would enable multi-messenger observations of Type Ia supernovae to constrain their progenitor and explosion mechanism. In this paper, we consider the event rate of WD-WD mergers and minimum detection range to observe one WD-WD merger per year, using nearby galaxy catalog and the relation between the Ia supernova and the host galaxy. Furthermore, we calculate the DECIGO's ability to localize WD-WD mergers and to determine the masses of binary mergers. We estimate that if the deci-Hz GW observatory can detect the GW whose amplitude is $h\sim10^{-20}[\rm Hz^{-1/2}]$ at 0.1 Hz, 1000 times higher than the detection limit of DECIGO. In fact, DECIGO is expected to detect WD-WD ($1M_{\odot}-1M_{\odot}$) mergers within $z=0.115$,corresponding to the detection rate of $\sim20000\,\rm yr^{-1}$, and identify the host galaxy of WD-WD mergers for $\sim8000$ WD-WDs only by the GW detection.
By means of 3-D hydrodynamical simulations, here we evaluate the impact that supernova explosions occurring within wind-driven bubbles have on the survival or destruction of dust grains. We consider both, the dust generated within the ejecta and the dust initially present in the ambient gas and later locked-up in the surrounding wind-driven shell. The collision of the supernova blast wave with the wind-driven shell leads to a transmitted shock that moves into the shell and a reflected shock into the ejecta. The transmitted shock is capable of destroying large amounts of the dust locked in the shell, but only if the mass of the wind-driven shell is small, less than a few tens the ejected mass. Conversely, massive wind-driven shells, with several times the ejected mass, lead upon the interaction to strong radiative cooling, which inhibits the Sedov-Taylor phase and weakens the transmitted shock, making it unable to traverse the wind-driven shell. In such a case, the destruction/disruption of the ambient dust is largely inhibited. On the other hand, the SNRs grow rapidly in the very tenuous region excavated by the stellar winds, and thus a large fraction of the dust generated within the ejecta is not efficiently destroyed by the supernova reverse shock, nor by the reflected shock. Our calculations favor a scenario in which core-collapse supernovae within sufficiently massive wind-driven shells supply more dust to the ISM than what they are able to destroy.
It has been well established from a variety of observations that red supergiants (RSGs) loose a lot of mass in stellar wind. Dust formed in this emitted gas over a few decades before core-collapse can lead to substantial extinction and obscure the intrinsic luminosity of the progenitor RSG. This may lead to a difficulty in determining the range of progenitor masses that lead to the different classes of supernovae. Even the nearby, well studied supernovae with pre-explosion observations, such as SN 2013ej may suffer from this uncertainty in the progenitor mass. We explore here two different masses proposed for its progenitor. We compute their pre-supernova characteristics using Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA). We show that a non-rotating star with the initial mass of 26 M$_{\odot}$ would require a considerable amount of circum-stellar medium (A$_V \sim$ 3) to obscure its high luminosity given the observed pre-explosion magnitudes detected by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Such a high value of visual extinction appears to be inconsistent with that derived for SN 2013ej as well as SN 2003gd in the same host galaxy M74. In contrast, the evolutionary models of lower mass (13 M$_{\odot}$) star are easily accommodated within the observed HST magnitudes. Some of the 26 M$_{\odot}$ simulations show luminosity variation in the last few years which could be discriminated by high cadence and multi-band monitoring of supernova candidates in nearby galaxies. We demonstrate that our calculations are well-resolved with adequate zoning and evolutionary time-steps.
We numerically simulate some of the most critical physical processes in galaxy formation: The supernova feedback, in conjunction with gasdynamics and gravity, plays a crucial role in determining how galaxies arise within the context of a model for large-scale structure. Our treatment incorporates a multi-phase model of the interstellar medium and includes the effects of cooling, heating and metal enrichment by supernovae, and evaporation of cold clouds. The star formation happens inside the clouds of cold gas, which are produced via thermal instability. We simulate the galaxy formation in standard biased CDM model for a variety of parameters and for several resolutions in the range 2--20$h^{-1}$kpc. In our picture, supernova feedback regulates the evolution of the gas components and star formation. The efficiency of cloud evaporation by supernova strongly influences star formation rates. This feedback results in a steady rate of star formation in large galaxies (mass larger than $2-3x10^{11}\Msun$) at a level of $(1-10)\Msun\yr$ for $z<3$. Supernova feedback has an even stronger effect on the evolution of dwarf galaxies, most of which have a small fraction of stars and extremely low luminosities: $M_R>-15$. In the case of both large and small galaxies, the distribution of luminous matter (stars) is strongly BIASED with respect to the dark matter. We find an approximate biasing measure of the form $\rho_{lum}= (\rho_{dm}/133)^{1.7}$ for z=0 and overdensities exceeding 1000. Deviations from this relation (a factor 2-3) depend on the environment. For halo masses exceeding $2x10^{10}\Msun$, the dependence of the absolute magnitude on the total mass can be approximated as $M_V=-18.5-4\log(M_{tot}/10^{11}\Msun)$, with a scatter of less than 0.5mag.
We present spectroscopic and photometric observations of the luminous narrow- line Type IIP (plateau) supernova 1994W. After the plateau phase (t >120 days), the light curve dropped by 3.5 mag in V in only 12 days. Between 125 and 197 days after explosion the supernova faded substantially faster than the decay rate of Co-56, and by day 197 it was 3.6 magnitudes less luminous in R compared to SN 1987A. The low R-luminosity could indicate less than 0.0026 {+0.0017}/ {-0.0011} Msun of Ni-56 ejected at the explosion, but the emission between 125 and 197 days must then have been dominated by an additional power source, pre- sumably circumstellar interaction. Alternatively, the late light curve was dominated by Co-56 decay. In this case, the mass of the ejected Ni-56 was 0.015 {+0.012}/{-0.008} Msun, and the rapid fading between 125 and 197 days was most likely due to dust formation. Though this value of the mass is higher than in the case with the additional power source, it is still lower than estimated for any previous Type II supernova. Only progenitors with M(ZAMS) = 8-10 Msun and M(ZAMS) > 25 Msun are expected to eject such low masses of Ni-56. If M(ZAMS) = 8-10 Msun, the plateau phase indicates a low explosion energy, while for a progenitor with M(ZAMS) > 25 Msun the energy can be the canonical 1.0E{51} ergs. As SN 1994W was unusually luminous, the low-mass explosion may require an uncomfortably high efficiency in converting explosion energy into radiation. This favors a M(ZAMS) > 25 Msun progenitor. The supernova's narrow (roughly 1000 km s^{-1}) emission lines were excited by the hot supernova spectrum, rather than a circumstellar shock. The thin shell from which the lines origi- nated was most likely accelerated by the radiation from the supernova.
The various effects leading to diversity in the bolometric light curves of supernovae are examined: nucleosynthesis, kinematic differences, ejected mass, degree of mixing, and configuration and intensity of the magnetic field are discussed. In Type Ia supernovae, a departure in the bolometric light curve from the full-trapping decline of $^{56}$Co can occur within the two and a half years after the explosion, depending on the evolutionary path followed by the WD during the accretion phase. If convection has developed in the WD core during the presupernova evolution, starting several thousand years before the explosion, a tangled magnetic field close to the equipartition value should have grown in the WD. Such an intense magnetic field would confine positrons where they originate from the $^{56}$Co decays, and preclude a strong departure from the full-trapping decline, as the supernova expands. This situation is expected to occur in C+O Chandrasekhar WDs as opposed to edge-lit detonated sub-Chandrasekhar WDs. If the pre-explosion magnetic field of the WD is less intense than 10$^{5-8}$G, a lack of confinement of the positrons emitted in the $^{56}$Co decay and a departure from full-trapping decline would occur. The time at which it takes place can provide estimates of the original magnetic field of the WD, its configuration, and also of the mass of the supernova ejecta. In SN 1991bg, the bolometric light curve suggests absence of a significant tangled magnetic field (intensity lower than $10^{3}$ G). Chandrasekhar-mass models do not reproduce the bolometric light curve of this supernova. For SN 1972E, on the contrary, there is evidence for a tangled configuration of the magnetic field and its light curve is well reproduced by a Chandrasekhar WD explosion.
The High-Z Supernova Search is an international collaboration to discover and monitor type Ia supernovae (SN Ia) at $z > 0.2$ with the aim of measuring cosmic deceleration and global curvature. Our collaboration has pursued a basic understanding of supernovae in the nearby Universe, discovering and observing a large sample of objects, and developing methods to measure accurate distances with SN Ia. This paper describes the extension of this program to $z \geq 0.2$, outlining our search techniques and follow-up program. We have devised high-throughput filters which provide accurate two-color restframe $B$ and $V$ light curves of SN Ia, enabling us to produce precise, extinction-corrected luminosity distances in the range $0.25 < z < 0.55$. Sources of systematic error from K-corrections, extinction, selection effects, and evolution are investigated, and their effects estimated. We present photometric and spectral observations of SN 1995K, our program's first supernova, and use the data to obtain a precise measurement of the luminosity distance to the $z=0.479$ host galaxy. This object, when combined with a nearby sample of SN, yields an estimate for the matter density of the Universe of $\Omega_M = -0.2^{+1.0}_{-0.8}$ if $\Omega_\Lambda = 0$. For a spatially flat universe composed of normal matter and a cosmological constant, we find $\Omega_M = 0.4^{+0.5}_{-0.4}$, $\Omega_\Lambda = 0.6^{+0.4}_{-0.5}$. We demonstrate that with a sample of $\sim 30$ objects, we should be able to determine relative luminosity distances over the range $0 < z< 0.5$ with sufficient precision to measure $\Omega_M$ with an uncertainty of $\pm 0.2$.
I present constraints on cosmological parameters in the lambda_0-Omega_0 plane from a joint analysis of gravitational lensing statistics (astro-ph/9904175) and the magnitude-redshift relation for Type Ia supernovae (astro-ph/9812133 and astro-ph/9805201). I discuss reasons why this particular combination of tests is important and how the constraints can be improved in the future. The lensing statistics and supernova results are not inconsistent, thus it is meaningful to determine joint constraints on lambda_0 and Omega_0 by combining the results from both tests. The quantity measured by the lens statistics and the m-z relation for type Ia supernovae discussed here is approximately lambda_0 - Omega_0. At 95% confidence, the upper limit on lambda_0 - Omega_0 from lensing statistics alone is 0.45 and from supernovae alone is in the range 0.65--0.81 (depending on the data set). For joint constraints, the upper limit on lambda_0 - Omega_0 is in the range 0.55--0.60 (again depending on the data set). For a flat universe with lambda_0 + Omega_0 = 1, this corresponds to upper limits on lambda_0, taking the top of the range from different data sets, of 0.72, 0.90 and 0.80 for lensing statistics alone, supernovae alone and the joint analysis, respectively. This is perfectly consistent with the current `standard cosmological model' with lambda_0 approximately 0.7 and Omega_0 approximately 0.3 and is consistent with a flat universe but, neglecting other cosmological tests, does not require it.
Relatively uniform light curves and spectral evolution of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) have led to the use of SNe Ia as a ``standard candle'' to determine cosmological parameters, such as the Hubble constant, the density parameter, and the cosmological constant. Whether a statistically significant value of the cosmological constant can be obtained depends on whether the peak luminosities of SNe Ia are sufficiently free from the effects of cosmic and galactic evolutions. Here we first review the single degenerate scenario for the Chandrasekhar mass white dwarf (WD) models of SNe Ia. We identify the progenitor's evolution and population with two channels: (1) the WD+RG (red-giant) and (2) the WD+MS (near main-sequence He-rich star) channels. In these channels, the strong wind from accreting white dwarfs plays a key role, which yields important age and metallicity effects on the evolution. We then address the questions whether the nature of SNe Ia depends systematically on environmental properties such as metallicity and age of the progenitor system and whether significant evolutionary effects exist. We suggest that the variation of the carbon mass fraction $X$(C) in the C+O WD (or the variation of the initial WD mass) causes the diversity of the brightness of SNe Ia. This model can explain the observed dependence of SNe Ia brighness on the galaxy types. Finally, applying the metallicity effect on the evolution of SN Ia progenitors, we make a prediction of the cosmic supernova rate history as a composite of the supernova rates in different types of galaxies.
If a black hole formed in a core-collapse supernova is accreting material from the base of the envelope, the accretion luminosity could be observable in the supernova light curve. Here we continue the study of matter fall back onto a black hole in the wake of a supernova and examine realistic supernovae models which allow for an early emergence of the accretion luminosity. Such cases may provide a direct observational identification of the black hole formed in the aftermath of the explosion. Our approach combines analytic estimates and fully relativistic, radiation-hydrodynamic numerical computations. We employ a numerical hydrodynamical scaling technique to accommodate the diverse range of dynamical time scales in a single simulation. We find that while in typical Type II supernovae heating by radioactive decays dominates the late-time light curve, low-energy explosions of more massive stars should provide an important exception where the accretion luminosity will emerge while it is still relatively large. Our main focus is on the only current candidate for such an observation, the very unusual SN1997D. Due to the low energy of the explosion and the very small ($2\times10^{-3} M_\sun$) inferred mass of Co56 in the ejected envelope, we find that accretion should become the dominant source of its luminosity during the year 2000. The total luminosity at emergence is expected to lie in the range $0.5-3\times10^{36} $ ergs/s, potentially detectable with HST. We also discuss the more favorable case of explosions which eject negligible amounts of radioactive isotopes and find that the black hole is likely to emerge a few tens of days after the explosion, with a luminosity of $\sim 10^{37} $\ergss.
R-band intensity measurements along the light curve of Type Ia supernovae discovered by the Supernova Cosmology Project (SCP) are fitted in brightness to templates allowing a free parameter the time-axis width factor w = s(1+z). The data points are then individually aligned in the time-axis, normalized and K-corrected back to the rest frame, after which the nearly 1300 normalized intensity measurements are found to lie on a well-determined common rest-frame B-band curve which we call the ``composite curve''. The same procedure is applied to 18 low-redshift Calan/Tololo SNe with z < 0.11; these nearly 300 B-band photometry points are found to lie on the composite curve equally well. The SCP search technique produces several measurements before maximum light for each supernova. We demonstrate that the linear stretch factor, s, which parameterizes the light-curve timescale appears independent of z,and applies equally well to the declining and rising parts of the light curve. In fact, the B-band template that best fits this composite curve fits the individual supernova photometry data when stretched by a factor s with chi^2/DoF approx = 1, thus as well as any parameterization can, given the current data sets. The measurement of the date of explosion, however, is model dependent and not tightly constrained by the current data.   We also demonstrate the 1+z light-curve time-axis broadening expected from cosmological expansion. This argues strongly against alternative explanations, such as tired light, for the redshift of distant objects.
We reanalyze $r$-process nucleosynthesis in the neutron-rich ejecta from a prompt supernova explosion of a low-mass (11 M$_\odot$) progenitor. A pompt explosion is not yet ruled out as a possibility for low-mass supernova progenitors. Moreover, there is mounting evidence that a new $r$-process site may be required. Hence, we assume that a prompt explosion can occur and make a study of r-process nucleosynthesis in the supernova ejecta. To achieve a prompt explosion we have performed a general relativistic hydrodynamic simulation of adiabatic collapse and bounce using a relativistic nuclear-matter equation of state. The electron fraction $Y_e$ during the collapse was fixed at the initial-model value. The size of the inner collapsing core was then large enough to enable a prompt explosion to occur. Adopting the calculated trajectories of promptly ejected material, we explicitly computed the burst of neutronization due to electron captures on free protons in the photodissociated ejecta after the passage of the shock. The thermal and compositional evolution of the resulting neutron-rich ejecta originating from near the surface of proto-neutron star was obtained. These were used in nuclear reaction network calculations to evaluate the products of $r$-process nucleosynthesis. We find that, unlike earlier studies, the amount of $r$-process material ejected per supernova is quite consistent with observed galactic $r$-process abundances. Furthermore, the computed $r$-process abundances are in good agreement with Solar abundances of $r$-process elements for A$> 100$. This suggests that prompt supernovae are still a viable $r$-process site. Such events may be responsible for the abundances of the heaviest $r$-process nuclei.
We report here on 5 GHz global very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) observations of SN 1986J, 16 yr after its explosion. We obtained a high-resolution image of the supernova, which shows a distorted shell of radio emission, indicative of a deformation of the shock front. The angular size of the shell is $\sim4.7 {\rm mas}$, corresponding to a linear size of $\sim6.8 \times 10^{17} {\rm cm}$ for a distance of 9.6 Mpc to NGC 891. The average speed of the shell has decreased from $\sim$7400 \kms in 1988.74 down to about $6300 {\rm km s^{-1}}$ in 1999.14, indicative of a mild deceleration in the expansion of SN 1986J. Assuming a standard density profile for the progenitor wind ($\rho_{\rm cs} \propto r^{-s}, s=2$), the swept-up mass by the shock front is $\sim$2.2\Ms. This large swept-up mass, coupled with the mild deceleration suffered by the supernova, suggests that the mass of the hydrogen-rich envelope ejected at explosion was $\ga12$ \Ms. Thus, the supernova progenitor must have kept intact most of its hydrogen-rich envelope by the time of explosion, which favours a single, massive star progenitor scenario. We find a flux density for SN 1986J of $\sim$7.2 mJy at the observing frequency of 5 GHz, which results in a radio luminosity of $\sim1.4 \times 10^{37} {\rm erg s^{-1}}$ for the frequency range $10^7$--$10^{10}$ Hz ($\alpha =-0.69; S_\nu \propto \nu^{\alpha})$. We detect four bright knots that delineate the shell structure, and an absolute minimum of emission, which we tentatively identify with the centre of the supernova explosion. If this is the case, SN 1986J has then suffered an asymmetric expansion. We suggest that this asymmetry is due to the collision of the supernova ejecta with an anisotropic, clumpy (or filamentary) medium.
Since 1997 the afterglow of gamma-ray bursting sources (GRBs) has occasionally been detected in the radio, as well in other wavelengths bands. In particular, the interesting and unusual gamma-ray burst GRB980425, thought to be related to the radio supernova SN1998bw, is a possible link between the two classes of objects. Analyzing the extensive radio emission data avaliable for SN1998bw, one can describe its time evolution within the well established framework available for the analysis of radio emission from supernovae. This then allows relatively detailed description of a number of physical properties of the object. The radio emission can best be explained as the interaction of a mildly relativistic shock with a dense preexplosion stellar wind-established circumstellar medium (CSM) that is highly structured both azimuthally, in clumps or filaments, and radially, with observed density enhancements. Because of its unusual characteristics for a Type Ib/c supernova, the relation of SN1998bw to GRB980425 is strengthened and suggests that at least some classes of GRBs originate in supernova (SN) massive star explosions. Thus, employing the formalism for describing the radio emission from supernovae (SNe) and following the link through SN1998bw/GRB980425, it is possible to model the gross properties of the radio and optical/infrared (OIR) emission from the half-dozen GRBs with extensive radio observations. From this we conclude that at least some members of the ``slow-soft'' class of GRBs can be attributed to the explosion of a massive star in a dense, highly structured CSM that was presumably established by the preexplosion stellar system.
We study the nucleosyntheses of the light elements 7Li and 11B and the r-process elements in Type II supernovae from the point of view of supernova neutrinos and Galactic chemical evolution. We investigate the influence of the luminosity and average energy (temperature) of supernova neutrinos on these two nucleosynthesis processes. Common models of the total energy E_nu and the decay time of the neutrino luminosity tau_nu of supernova neutrinos are adopted to understand both processes. We adopt the model of the supernova explosion of a 16.2 M_odot star, which corresponds to SN 1987A, and calculate the nucleosynthesis of the light elements by the postprocessing. We find that the ejected masses of 7Li and 11B are roughly proportional to the total neutrino energy and weakly dependent on the decay time of the neutrino luminosity. As for the r-process nucleosynthesis, we adopt the same models of the neutrino luminosity in the neutrino-driven wind models of a 1.4 M_odot neutron star. We find that the r-process nucleosynthesis is affected through the peak neutrino luminosity, which depends on E_nu/tau_nu. We also discuss the unresolved problem of the overproduction of 11B in the Galactic chemical evolution of the light elements. We have to assume E_{nu} < 1.2 \times 10^{53} ergs to avoid the overproduction of 11B, which is too small to accept in comparison to 3.0 \times 10^{53} ergs deduced from the observation of SN1987A. We propose to reduce the temperature of nu_{mu, tau} and their anti-particles to T_{nu_{mu, tau}} = T_{bar{nu}_{mu,tau}} = 6.0 MeV/k. This modification of the neutrino temperature is shown to resolve the overproduction problem of 11B while still keeping a successful r-process abundance pattern.
We investigate the formation of dust grains in the ejecta of population III supernovae including pair--instability supernovae, applying a theory of non-- steady state nucleation and grain growth. In the calculations, the time evolution of gas temperature in theejecta, which strongly affects the number density and size of newly formed grains, is calculated by solving the radiative transfer equation taking account of the energy deposition of radio active elements. Two extreme cases are considered for the mixing of elements in the ejecta; unmixed and uniformly mixed cases within the He--core.   The results of calculations are summarized as the followings; in the unmixed ejecta, a variety of grain species condense, reflecting the difference of the elemental composition at the formation site in the ejecta, otherwise only oxide grains condense in the uniformly mixed ejecta. The average size of newly formed grains spans the range of three orders of magnitude, depending on the grain species and the formation condition, and the maximum radius is limited to less than 1 $\mu$m, which does not depend on the progenitor mass. The size distribution function summed up over all grain species is approximated by a power--law formula whose index is -3.5 for the larger radius and -2.5 for the smaller one; the radius at the crossover point ranges from 0.004 to 0.1 $\mu$m, depending on the model of supernovae. The fraction of mass locked into dust grains increases with increasing the progenitor mass; 2--5 % of the progenitor mass for core collapse supernovae and 15--30 % for pair--instability supernovae whose progenitor mass ranges from 140 to 260 $M_{\odot}$. Thus, if the very massive stars populate the first generation stars, a large amount of dust grains would be produced in the early universe.
We present the results of a study of the host galaxies of high redshift Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). We provide a catalog of 18 hosts of SNe Ia observed with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) by the High-z Supernova Search Team (HZT), including images, scale-lengths, measurements of integrated (Hubble equivalent) BVRIZ photometry in bands where the galaxies are brighter than m ~ 25 mag, and galactocentric distances of the supernovae. We compare the residuals of SN Ia distance measurements from cosmological fits to measurable properties of the supernova host galaxies that might be expected to correlate with variable properties of the progenitor population, such as host galaxy color and position of the supernova. We find mostly null results; the current data are generally consistent with no correlations of the distance residuals with host galaxy properties in the redshift range 0.42 < z < 1.06. Although a subsample of SN hosts shows a formally significant (3-sigma) correlation between apparent V-R host color and distance residuals, the correlation is not consistent with the null results from other host colors probed by our largest samples. There is also evidence for the same correlations between SN Ia properties and host type at low redshift and high redshift. These similarities support the current practice of extrapolating properties of the nearby population to high redshifts pending more robust detections of any correlations between distance residuals from cosmological fits and host properties.
We present and analyse spectra of the Type IIn supernova 1994W obtained between 18 and 203 days after explosion. During the luminous phase (first 100 d) the line profiles are composed of three major components: (i) narrow P-Cygni lines with the absorption minima at -700 km/s; (ii) broad emission lines with BVZI ~4000 km/s; and (iii) broad, smooth wings, most apparent in H-alpha. These components are identified with an expanding circumstellar (CS) envelope, shocked cool gas in the forward post-shock region, and multiple Thomson scattering in the CS envelope, respectively. The absence of broad P-Cygni lines from the supernova is the result of the formation of an optically thick, cool, dense shell at the interface of the ejecta and the CS envelope. We model the supernova deceleration and Thomson scattering wings to recover the density, radial extent and Thomson optical depth of the CS envelope during the first month. We reproduce the light curve with a hydrodynamical model and find it to be powered by a combination of internal energy leakage after the explosion of an extended pre-supernova (~10^15 cm) and luminosity from circumstellar interaction. We recover the pre-explosion kinematics of the CS envelope: it is close to homologous expansion with outer velocity ~1100 km/s and a kinematic age of ~1.5 yr. The CS envelope's high mass and kinetic energy, combined with its small age, strongly suggest that the CS envelope was explosively ejected about 1.5 yr before the supernova explosion.
We present Spitzer/MIPS 24 micron observations of 50 supernova host galaxies at 0.1<z<1.7 in the Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey (GOODS) fields. We also discuss the detection of SN host galaxies in SCUBA/850 micron observations of GOODS-N and Spitzer/Infrared Spectrograph (IRS) 16 micron observations of GOODS-S. About 60% of the host galaxies of both Type Ia and core-collapse supernovae are detected at 24 microns, a detection rate which is a factor of 1.5 higher than the field galaxy population. Among the 24 micron detected hosts, 80% have far-infrared luminosities that are comparable to or greater than the optical luminosity indicating the presence of substantial amounts of dust in the hosts. The median bolometric luminosity of the Type Ia SN hosts is \~10^10.5 L_sun, very similar to that of core-collapse SN hosts. Using the high resolution Hubble/ACS data, we have studied the variation of rest-frame optical/ultraviolet colors within the 24 micron detected galaxies at z<1 to understand the origin of the dust emission. The 24 micron detected galaxies have average colors which are redder by ~0.1 mag than the 24 micron undetected hosts while the latter show greater scatter in internal colors. This suggests that a smooth distribution of dust is responsible for the observed mid- and far-infrared emission. 70% of supernovae that have been detected in the GOODS fields are located within the half-light radius of the hosts where dust obscuration effects are significant. Although the dust emission that we detect cannot be translated into a line of sight A_V, we suggest that the factor of 2-3 larger scatter in the peak B-V colors that is seen in the high-z Type Ia supernova sample relative to the low-z supernovae might be partially due to the dust that we detect in the hosts.
We present measurements of \Omega_m and \Omega_{\Lambda} from a blind analysis of 21 high-redshift supernovae using a new technique (CMAGIC) for fitting the multi-color lightcurves of Type Ia supernovae, first introduced in Wang et al. (2003). CMAGIC takes advantage of the remarkably simple behavior of Type Ia supernovae on color-magnitude diagrams, and has several advantages over current techniques based on maximum magnitudes. Among these are a reduced sensitivity to host galaxy dust extinction, a shallower luminosity-width relation, and the relative simplicity of the fitting procedure. This allows us to provide a cross check of previous supernova cosmology results, despite the fact that current data sets were not observed in a manner optimized for CMAGIC. We describe the details of our novel blindness procedure, which is designed to prevent experimenter bias. The data are broadly consistent with the picture of an accelerating Universe, and agree with a flat Universe within 1.7\sigma, including systematics. We also compare the CMAGIC results directly with those of a maximum magnitude fit to the same SNe, finding that CMAGIC favors more acceleration at the 1.6\sigma level, including systematics and the correlation between the two measurements. A fit for w assuming a flat Universe yields a value which is consistent with a cosmological constant within 1.2\sigma.
In the framework of the study of supernova remnants and their complex interaction with the interstellar medium, we report on an XMM-Newton EPIC observation of the Galactic supernova remnant W49B. We investigate the spatial distribution of the chemical and physical properties of the plasma, so as to get important constraints on the physical scenario, on the dynamics of the supernova explosion, and on the interaction of the supernova remnant with the ambient interstellar clouds. We present line images, equivalent width maps, and a spatially resolved spectral analysis of a set of homogeneous regions. The X-ray spectrum of W49B is characterized by strong K emission lines from Si, S, Ar, Ca and Fe. In all the regions studied, the X-ray spectrum is dominated by the emission from the ejecta and there is no indication of radial stratification of the elements. A high overabundance of Ni (Ni/Ni_sun=10^{+2}_{-1}) is required in the bright central region and the previous detection of Cr and Mn line emission is confirmed. Spectra are well described by two thermal components in collisional ionization equilibrium. We observe spatial variations in the temperature, with the highest temperature found in the east and the lowest in the west. Our results support a scenario in which the X-ray emission comes from ejecta interacting with a dense belt of ambient material, but another possibility is that the remnant is the result of an asymmetric bipolar explosion with the eastern jet being hotter and more Fe-rich than the western jet. The eastern jet is confined by interaction with ambient molecular clouds. Comparison of the observed abundances with yields for hypernova and supernova nucleosynthesis does not directly support the association of W49B with a gamma-ray burst, although it remains possible.
It is generally accepted that Anomalous X-ray Pulsars (AXPs) and Soft Gamma-ray Repeaters (SGRs) are magnetars, i.e. neutron stars with extremely high surface magnetic fields ($B > 10^{14}$ G). The origin of these high magnetic fields is uncertain, but a popular hypothesis is that magnetars are born with an initial spin period not much exceeding the convective overturn time (~3ms), which results in a powerful dynamo action, amplifying the seed magnetic field to $> ~10^{15}$ G. Part of this rotation energy is then expected to power the supernova through rapid magnetic braking. It is therefore possible that magnetars creation is accompanied by supernovae that are an order of magnitude more energetic than normal supernovae, provided their initial spin period is ~1 ms. However, we list here evidence that the explosion energies of these supernova remnants associated with AXPs and SGRs -- Kes 73 (AXP 1E 1841-045), CTB 109 (AXP 1E2259+586) and N49 (SGR 0526-66) -- are close to the canonical supernova explosion energy of $10^{51}$~erg, suggesting an initial spin period of > ~5ms.   We therefore do not find evidence that magnetars are formed from rapidly rotating proto-neutron stars, allowing for the possibility that they descend from stellar progenitor with high magnetic field cores, and we discuss the merits of both formation scenarios.   In an appendix we describe the analysis of XMM-Newton observations of Kes 73 and N49 used to derive the explosion energies for these remnants.
Realistic atmospheric models that link the properties and the physical conditions of supernova ejecta to observable spectra are required for the quantitative interpretation of observational data of type Ia supernovae (SN Ia) and the assessment of the physical merits of theoretical supernova explosion models. The numerical treatment of the radiation transport - yielding the synthetic spectra - in models of SN Ia ejecta in early phases is usually carried out in analogy to atmospheric models of `normal' hot stars. Applying this analogy indiscriminately leads to inconsistencies in SN Ia models because a diffusive lower boundary, while justified for hot stars, is invalid for hydrogen and helium-deficient supernova ejecta. In type Ia supernovae the radiation field does not thermalize even at large depths, and large optical depths are not reached at all wavelengths. We derive an improved description of the lower boundary that allows a more consistent solution of the radiation transfer in SN Ia and therefore yields more realistic synthetic spectra. We analyze the conditions that lead to a breakdown of the conventional diffusion approximation as the lower boundary in SN Ia. For the radiative transfer, we use a full non-LTE code originally developed for radiatively driven winds of hot stars, with adaptations for the physical conditions in SN Ia. In addition to a well-tested treatment of the underlying microphysical processes, this code allows a direct comparison of the results for SN Ia and hot stars. We develop a semi-analytical description that allows us to overcome some of the limiting assumptions in the conventional treatment of the lower boundary in SN Ia radiative transfer models. We achieve good agreement in a comparison between the synthetic spectrum of our test model and an observed spectrum.
We present extensive u'g'r'i'BVRIYJHKs photometry and optical spectroscopy of SN 2005hk. These data reveal that SN 2005hk was nearly identical in its observed properties to SN 2002cx, which has been called ``the most peculiar known type Ia supernova.'' Both supernovae exhibited high ionization SN 1991T-like pre-maximum spectra, yet low peak luminosities like SN 1991bg. The spectra reveal that SN 2005hk, like SN 2002cx, exhibited expansion velocities that were roughly half those of typical type Ia supernovae. The R and I light curves of both supernovae were also peculiar in not displaying the secondary maximum observed for normal type Ia supernovae. Our YJH photometry of SN 2005hk reveals the same peculiarity in the near-infrared. By combining our optical and near-infrared photometry of SN 2005hk with published ultraviolet light curves obtained with the Swift satellite, we are able to construct a bolometric light curve from ~10 days before to ~60 days after B maximum. The shape and unusually low peak luminosity of this light curve, plus the low expansion velocities and absence of a secondary maximum at red and near-infrared wavelengths, are all in reasonable agreement with model calculations of a 3D deflagration which produces ~0.25 M_sun of 56Ni.
(abridged) We report our discovery and observations of the peculiar Type IIn supernova SN2006gy in NGC1260, revealing that it reached a peak magnitude of -22, making it the most luminous supernova ever recorded. It is not yet clear what powers the total radiated energy of 1e51 erg, but we argue that any mechanism -- thermal emission, circumstellar interaction, or 56Ni decay -- requires a very massive progenitor star. The circumstellar interaction hypothesis would require truly exceptional conditions around the star probably experienced an LBV eruption like the 19th century eruption of eta Carinae. Alternatively, radioactive decay of 56Ni may be a less objectionable hypothesis. That power source would imply a large Ni mass of 22 Msun, requiring that SN2006gy was a pair-instability supernova where the star's core was obliterated. SN2006gy is the first supernova for which we have good reason to suspect a pair-instability explosion. Based on a number of lines of evidence, we rule out the hypothesis that SN 2006gy was a ``Type IIa'' event. Instead, we propose that the progenitor may have been a very massive evolved object like eta Carinae that, contrary to expectations, failed to completely shed its massive hydrogen envelope before it died. Our interpretation of SN2006gy implies that the most massive stars can explode earlier than expected, during the LBV phase, preventing them from ever becoming Wolf-Rayet stars. SN2006gy also suggests that the most massive stars can create brilliant supernovae instead of dying ignominious deaths through direct collapse to a black hole.
We present here the first 2D rotating, multi-group, radiation magnetohydrodynamics (RMHD) simulations of supernova core collapse, bounce, and explosion. In the context of rapid rotation, we focus on the dynamical effects of magnetic stresses and the creation and propagation of MHD jets. We find that a quasi-steady state can be quickly established after bounce, during which a well-collimated MHD jet is maintained by continuous pumping of power from the differentially rotating core. If the initial spin period of the progenitor core is $\sles$ 2 seconds, the free energy reservoir in the secularly evolving protoneutron star is adequate to power a supernova explosion, and may be enough for a hypernova. The jets are well collimated by the infalling material and magnetic hoop stresses, and maintain a small opening angle. We see evidence of sausage instabilities in the emerging jet stream. Neutrino heating is sub-dominant in the rapidly rotating models we explore, but can contribute 10$-$25% to the final explosion energy. Our simulations suggest that even in the case of modest or slow rotation, a supernova explosion might be followed by a secondary, weak MHD jet explosion, which, because of its weakness may to date have gone unnoticed in supernova debris. Furthermore, we suggest that the generation of a non-relativistic MHD precursor jet during the early protoneutron star/supernova phase is implicit in both the collapsar and "millisecond magnetar" models of GRBs. The multi-D, multi-group, rapidly rotating RMHD simulations we describe here are a start along the path towards more realistic simulations of the possible role of magnetic fields in some of Nature's most dramatic events.
We study the late evolution of solar metallicity stars in the transition region between white dwarf formation and core collapse. This includes the super-asymptotic giant branch (super-AGB, SAGB) stars, which have massive enough cores to ignite carbon burning and form an oxygen-neon (ONe) core. The most massive SAGB stars have cores that may grow to the Chandrasekhar mass because of continued shell-burning. Their cores collapse, triggering a so called electron capture supernovae (ECSN). From stellar evolution models we find that the initial mass range for SAGB evolution is 7.5 ... 9.25\msun. We perform calculations with three different stellar evolution codes to investigate the sensitivity of this mass range to some of the uncertainties in current stellar models. The mass range significantly depends on the treatment of semiconvective mixing and convective overshooting. To consider the effect of a large number of thermal pulses, as expected in SAGB stars, we construct synthetic SAGB models that include a semi-analytical treatment of dredge-up, hot-bottom burning, and thermal pulse properties. This synthetic model enables us to compute the evolution of the main properties of SAGB stars from the onset of thermal pulses until the core reaches the Chandrasekhar mass or is uncovered by the stellar wind. Thereby, we determine the stellar initial mass ranges that produce ONe-white dwarfs and electron-capture supernovae. The latter is found to be 9.0 ... 9.25\msun for our fiducial model, implying that electron-capture supernovae would constitute about 4% of all supernovae in the local universe. Our synthetic approach allows us to explore the uncertainty of this number imposed by uncertainties in the third dredge-up efficiency and ABG mass loss rate. We find for ECSNe a upper limit of ~20% of all supernovae (abridged).
We discuss our radio (Australia Telescope Compact Array and Australian Long Baseline Array) and X-ray (XMM-Newton) monitoring observations of the unusual ultraluminous supernova SN 1978K in NGC 1313 at ~25 years after the explosion. SN 1978K is a rare example of a Type IIn supernova that has remained bright enough to have long-term X-ray and radio observations. The observations probe the dense medium that was ejected by the progenitor star prior to its explosion; the star might have been a Luminous Blue Variable. The radio imaging shows that the source remains compact, but it may be marginally resolved. The radio monitoring shows deviations from a smooth decay suggesting that inhomogeneities are present in the radio emitting region. It appears that a major change occurred in the mass-loss rate of the progenitor star shortly before the supernova event. The X-ray emission between 2000 and 2006 is consistent with the radiation coming from two shocks. All the X-ray data can be fit using the same model (with no systematic evolution or short-term variability) but this has a surprising requirement: the X-ray emitting regions have a very large abundance of helium. This would be consistent with the X-ray emitting shocks being located in a helium-rich layer that was ejected by the progenitor star, or helium-rich material was ejected in the supernova explosion. The unusual properties of the supernova motivated a search for an associated gamma-ray burst (GRB). We show that SN 1978K was inside the ~4 sigma error box of GRB 771029. If this association is correct, the GRB was exceptionally underluminous. However, the quality of the gamma-ray burst locations at that time was poor, and this is likely just a chance alignment.
When the afterglow fades at the site of a long-duration gamma-ray burst (LGRB), Type Ic supernovae (SN Ic) are the only type of core collapse supernova observed. Recent work found that a sample of LGRB in high-redshift galaxies had different environments from a collection of core-collapse environments, which were identified from their colors and light curves. LGRB were in the brightest regions of their hosts, but the core-collapse sample followed the overall distribution of the galaxy light. Here we examine 504 supernovae with types assigned based on their spectra that are located in nearby (z < 0.06) galaxies for which we have constructed surface photometry from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). The distributions of the thermonuclear supernovae (SN Ia) and some varieties of core-collapse supernovae (SN II and SN Ib) follow the galaxy light, but the SN Ic (like LGRB) are much more likely to erupt in the brightest regions of their hosts. The high-redshift hosts of LGRB are overwhelmingly irregulars, without bulges, while many low redshift SN Ic hosts are spirals with small bulges. When we remove the bulge light from our low-redshift sample, the SN Ic and LGRB distributions agree extremely well. If both LGRB and SN Ic stem from very massive stars, then it seems plausible that the conditions necessary for forming SN Ic are also required for LGRB. Additional factors, including metallicity, may determine whether the stellar evolution of a massive star leads to a LGRB with an underlying broad-lined SN Ic, or simply a SN Ic without a gamma-ray burst.
The collisionally pumped, ground-state 1720 MHz maser line of OH is widely recognized as a tracer for shocked regions and observed in star forming regions and supernova remnants. Whereas some lines of excited states of OH have been detected and studied in star forming regions, the subject of excited-state OH in supernova remnants -- where high collision rates are to be expected -- is only recently being addressed. Modeling of collisional excitation of OH demonstrates that 1720, 4765 and 6049 MHz masers can occur under similar conditions in regions of shocked gas. In particular, the 6049 and 4765 MHz masers become more significant at increased OH column densities where the 1720 MHz masers begin to be quenched. In supernova remnants, the detection of excited-state OH line maser emission could therefore serve as a probe of regions of higher column densities. Using the Very Large Array, we searched for excited-state OH in the 4.7, 7.8, 8.2 and 23.8 GHz lines in four well studied supernova remnants with strong 1720 MHz maser emission (SgrAEast, W28, W44 and IC443). No detections were made, at typical detection limits of around 10 mJy/beam. The search for the 6 GHz lines were done using Effelsberg since the VLA receivers did not cover those frequencies, and are reported on in an accompanying letter (Fish, Sjouwerman & Pihlstrom 2007). We also cross-correlated the positions of known supernova remnants with the positions of 1612 MHz maser emission obtained from blind surveys. No probable associations were found, perhaps except in the SgrAEast region. The lack of detections of excited-state OH indicates that the OH column densities suffice for 1720 MHz inversion but not for inversion of excited-state transitions, consistent with the expected results for C-type shocks.
We construct a new model of Type Ia Supernovae (SNe Ia), based on the single degenerate scenario, taking account of the metallicity dependences of the white dwarf (WD) wind and the mass-stripping effect on the binary companion star. Our model naturally predicts that the SN Ia lifetime distribution spans a range of 0.1-20 Gyr with the double peaks at ~0.1 and 1 Gyr. While the present SN Ia rate in elliptical galaxies can be reproduced with the old population of the red-giants+WD systems, the large SN Ia rate in radio galaxies could be explained with the young population of the main-sequence+WD systems. Because of the metallicity effect, i.e., because of the lack of winds from WDs in the binary systems, the SN Ia rate in the systems with [Fe/H]<-1, e.g., high-z spiral galaxies, is supposed to be very small. Our SN Ia model can give better reproduction of the [(alpha, Mn, Zn)/Fe]-[Fe/H] relations in the solar neighborhood than other models such as the double-degenerate scenario. The metallicity effect is more strongly required in the presence of the young population of SNe Ia. We also succeed in reproducing the galactic supernova rates with their dependence on the morphological type of galaxies, and the cosmic SN Ia rate history with a peak at z~1. At z>1, the predicted SN Ia rate decreases toward higher redshifts and SNe Ia will be observed only in the systems that have evolved with a short timescale of chemical enrichment. This suggests that the evolution effect in the supernova cosmology can be small.
We present numerical simulations of primordial supernovae in cosmological minihalos at $z \sim$ 20. We consider Type II supernovae, hypernovae, and pair instability supernovae (PISN) in halos from 6.9 $\times$ 10$^5$ - 1.2 $\times$ 10$^7$ $\Ms$, those in which Population III stars are expected to form via H$_2$ cooling. The supernovae evolve along two evolutionary paths according to whether they explode in \ion{H}{2} regions or neutral halos. Those in \ion{H}{2} regions first expand adiabatically and then radiate strongly upon collision with baryons ejected from the halo during its photoevaporation by the progenitor. Explosions in neutral halos promptly emit most of their kinetic energy as x-rays, but retain enough momentum to seriously disrupt the halo. We find that the least energetic of the supernovae are capable of destroying halos $\lesssim$ 10$^7$ $\Ms$, while a single PISN can destroy even more massive halos. Blasts in \ion{H}{2} regions disperse heavy elements into the IGM, but neutral halos confine the explosion and its metals. In \ion{H}{2} regions, a prompt second generation of stars may form in the remnant at radii of 100 - 200 pc in the halo. Explosions confined by large halos instead recollapse, with infall rates in excess of 10$^{-2}$ $\Ms$ yr$^{-1}$ that heavily contaminate their interior. This fallback may either fuel massive black hole growth at very high redshifts or create the first globular cluster with a radius of 10 - 20 pc at the center of the halo. Our findings allow the possibility that the first primitive galaxies formed sooner, with greater numbers of stars and distinct chemical abundance patterns, than in current models.
While the average metallicity of the intergalactic medium rises above Z~10^{-3} Zsun by the end of the reionization, pockets of metal-free gas can still exist at later times. We quantify the presence of a long tail in the formation rate of metal-free halos during late stages of reionization (redshift z~6), which might offer the best window to detect Population III stars. Using cosmological simulations for the growth of dark matter halos, coupled with analytical recipes for the metal enrichment of their interstellar medium, we show that pockets of metal-free gas exist at z~6 even under the assumption of high efficiency in metal pollution via winds. A comoving metal-free halo formation rate d^2n/dtdV > 10^{-9} Mpc^{-3}yr^{-1} is expected at z=6 for halos with virial temperature T_{vir}~10^4 K (mass ~10^8 Msun), sufficient to initiate cooling even with strong negative radiative feedback. Under the assumption of a single Population III supernova formed per metal-free halo, we expect an observed supernova rate of 2.6x10^{-3} deg^{-2}yr^{-1} in the same redshift range. These metal-free stars and their supernovae will be isolated and outside galaxies (at distances >150 h^{-1} kpc) and thus significantly less biased than the general population of ~10^8 Msun halos at z~6. Supernova searches for metal-free explosions must thus rely on large area surveys. If metal-free stars produce very luminous supernovae, like SN2006gy, then a multi-epoch survey reaching m_AB =27 at 1 micron is sufficient for detecting them at z=6. While the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope will not reach this depth in the z band, it will be able to detect several tens of Population III supernovae in the i and r bands at z <5.5, when their observed rate is down to 3-8x10^{-4} deg^{-2} yr^{-1}.
Cadenced optical imaging surveys in the next decade will be capable of detecting time-varying galaxy-scale strong gravitational lenses in large numbers, increasing the size of the statistically well-defined samples of multiply-imaged quasars by two orders of magnitude, and discovering the first strongly-lensed supernovae. We carry out a detailed calculation of the likely yields of several planned surveys, using realistic distributions for the lens and source properties and taking magnification bias and image configuration detectability into account. We find that upcoming wide-field synoptic surveys should detect several thousand lensed quasars. In particular, the LSST should find 8000 lensed quasars, 3000 of which will have well-measured time delays, and also ~130 lensed supernovae, which is compared with ~15 lensed supernovae predicted to be found by the JDEM. We predict the quad fraction to be ~15% for the lensed quasars and ~30% for the lensed supernovae. Generating a mock catalogue of around 1500 well-observed double-image lenses, we compute the available precision on the Hubble constant and the dark energy equation parameters for the time delay distance experiment (assuming priors from Planck): the predicted marginalised 68% confidence intervals are \sigma(w_0)=0.15, \sigma(w_a)=0.41, and \sigma(h)=0.017. While this is encouraging in the sense that these uncertainties are only 50% larger than those predicted for a space-based type-Ia supernova sample, we show how the dark energy figure of merit degrades with decreasing knowledge of the the lens mass distribution. (Abridged)
Even in a universe that is homogeneous on large scales, local density fluctuations can imprint a systematic signature on the cosmological inferences we make from distant sources. One example is the effect of a local under-density on supernova cosmology. Also known as a Hubble-bubble, it has been suggested that a large enough under-density could account for the supernova magnitude- redshift relation without the need for dark energy or acceleration. Although the size and depth of under-density required for such an extreme result is extremely unlikely to be a random fluctuation in an on-average homogeneous universe, even a small under-density can leave residual effects on our cosmological inferences.   In this paper we show that there remain systematic shifts in our cosmological parameter measure- ments, even after excluding local supernovae that are likely to be within any small Hubble-bubble. We study theoretically the low-redshift cutoff typically imposed by supernova cosmology analyses, and show that a low-redshift cut of z0 \sim 0.02 may be too low based on the observed inhomogeneity in our local universe.   Neglecting to impose any low-redshift cutoff can have a significant effect on the cosmological pa- rameters derived from supernova data. A slight local under-density, just 30% under-dense with scale 70h^{-1} Mpc, causes an error in the inferred cosmological constant density {\Omega}{\Lambda} of \sim 4%. Imposing a low-redshift cutoff reduces this systematic error but does not remove it entirely. A residual systematic shift of 0.99% remains in the inferred value {\Omega}{\Lambda} even when neglecting all data within the currently pre- ferred low-redshift cutoff of 0.02. Given current measurement uncertainties this shift is not negligible, and will need to be accounted for when future measurements yield higher precision.
Type Ia supernovae are generally thought to be due to the thermonuclear explosions of carbon-oxygen white dwarfs with masses near the Chandrasekhar mass. This scenario, however, has two long-standing problems. First, the explosions do not naturally produce the correct mix of elements, but have to be finely tuned to proceed from sub-sonic deflagration to super-sonic detonation. Second, population models and observations give formation rates of near-Chandrasekhar white dwarfs that are far too small. Here, we suggest that type Ia supernovae instead result from mergers of roughly equal-mass carbon-oxygen white dwarfs, including those that produce sub-Chandrasekhar mass remnants. Numerical studies of such mergers have shown that the remnants consist of rapidly rotating cores that contain most of the mass and are hottest in the center, surrounded by dense, small disks. We argue that the disks accrete quickly, and that the resulting compressional heating likely leads to central carbon ignition. This ignition occurs at densities for which pure detonations lead to events similar to type Ia supernovae. With this merger scenario, we can understand the type Ia rates, and have plausible reasons for the observed range in luminosity and for the bias of more luminous supernovae towards younger populations. We speculate that explosions of white dwarfs slowly brought to the Chandrasekhar limit---which should also occur---are responsible for some of the "atypical" type Ia supernovae.
The association of long-duration gamma-ray bursts (LGRBs) with Type Ic supernovae presents a challenge to supernova explosion models. In the collapsar model for LGRBs, gamma rays are produced in an ultrarelativistic jet launching from the magnetosphere of the black hole that forms in the aftermath of the collapse of a rotating progenitor star. The jet is collimated along the star's rotation axis, but the concomitant luminous supernova should be relatively--though certainly not entirely--spherical, and should synthesize a substantial mass of 56Ni. Our goal is to provide a qualitative assessment of the possibility that accretion of the progenitor envelope onto the black hole, which powers the LGRB, could also deposit sufficient energy and nickel mass in the envelope to produce a luminous supernova. For this, the energy dissipated near the black hole during accretion must be transported outward, where it can drive a supernova-like shockwave. Here we suggest that the energy is transported by convection and develop an analytical toy model, relying on global mass and energy conservation, for the dynamics of stellar collapse. The model suggests that a ~10,000 km/s shock can be driven into the envelope and that ~10^51 erg explosions are possible. The efficiency with which the accretion energy is being transferred to the envelope is governed by the competition of advection and convection at distances ~100-1,000 km from the black hole and is sensitive to the values of the convective mixing length, the magnitude of the effective viscous stress, and the specific angular momentum of the infalling envelope. Substantial masses of 56Ni may be synthesized in the convective accretion flow over the course of tens of seconds from the initial circularization of the infalling envelope around the black hole. The synthesized nickel is convectively mixed with a much larger mass of unburned ejecta.
Neutron-rich isotopes with masses near that of iron are produced in type Ia and II supernovae. Traces of such nucleosynthesis are found in primitive meteorites in the form of variations in the isotopic abundance of 54Cr, the most neutron-rich stable isotope of chromium. The hosts of these isotopic anomalies must be presolar grains that condensed in the outflows of supernovae, offering the opportunity to study the nucleosynthesis of iron-peak nuclei in ways that complement spectroscopic observations and can inform models of stellar evolution. However, despite almost two decades of extensive search, the carrier of 54Cr anomalies is still unknown, presumably because it is fine-grained and is chemically labile. Here we identify in the primitive meteorite Orgueil the carrier of 54Cr-anomalies as nanoparticles, most likely spinels that show large enrichments in 54Cr relative to solar composition (54Cr/52Cr ratio >3.6xsolar). Such large enrichments in 54Cr can only be produced in supernovae. The mineralogy of the grains supports condensation in the O/Ne-O/C zones of a type II supernova, although a type Ia origin cannot be excluded. We suggest that planetary materials incorporated different amounts of these nanoparticles, possibly due to late injection by a nearby supernova that also delivered 26Al and 60Fe to the solar system. This idea explains why the relative abundance of 54Cr and other neutron-rich isotopes vary between planets and meteorites. We anticipate that future isotopic studies of the grains identified here will shed new light on the birth of the solar system and the conditions insupernovae.
We present an analysis of peculiar velocities and their effect on supernova cosmology. In particular, we study (a) the corrections due to our own motion, (b) the effects of correlations in peculiar velocities induced by large-scale structure, and (c) uncertainties arising from a possible local under- or over-density. For all of these effects we present a case study of their impact on the cosmology derived by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey-II Supernova Survey (SDSS-II SN Survey). Correcting supernova redshifts for the CMB dipole slightly over-corrects nearby supernovae that share some of our local motion. We show that while neglecting the CMB dipole would cause a shift in the derived equation of state of Delta w ~ 0.04 (at fixed matter density) the additional local-motion correction is currently negligible (Delta w<0.01). We use a covariance-matrix approach to statistically account for correlated peculiar velocities. This down-weights nearby supernovae and effectively acts as a graduated version of the usual sharp low-redshift cut. Neglecting coherent velocities in the current sample causes a systematic shift of ~2% in the preferred value of w and will therefore have to be considered carefully when future surveys aim for percent-level accuracy. Finally, we perform n-body simulations to estimate the likely magnitude of any local density fluctuation (monopole) and estimate the impact as a function of the low-redshift cutoff. We see that for this aspect the low-z cutoff of z=0.02 is well-justified theoretically, but that living in a putative local density fluctuation leaves an indelible imprint on the magnitude-redshift relation.
We present observations and interpretation of the Type IIn supernova SN 2008am discovered by the ROTSE Supernova Verification Project (RSVP). SN 2008am peaked at approximately -22.3 mag at a redshift of z=0.2338, giving it a peak luminosity of 3 x 10^{44}erg/s and making it one of the most luminous supernovae ever observed. The total radiated energy is ~ 2 x 10^{51} erg. Photometric observations in the ultraviolet, optical and infrared bands (J,H,Ks) constrain the SED evolution. We obtained six optical spectra of the supernova, five on the early decline from maximum light and a sixth nearly a year later plus a very late-time spectrum (~2 yr) of the host galaxy. The spectra of SN 2008am show strong Balmer-line and He I lambda 5876A emission with intermediate widths (~25A) in the first ~40 days after optical maximum. We examine a variety of models for the line wings and conclude that multiple scattering is most likely, implying that our spectra contain no specific information on the bulk flow velocity. We examine a variety of models for the ROTSE light curve subject to the rise time and the nature of the spectra, including radioactive decay, shocks in optically-thick and optically-thin circumstellar media (CSM) and a magnetar. The most successful model is one for which the CSM is optically-thick and in which diffusion of forward shock-deposited luminosity gives rise to the observed light curve. Diffusion of the shock-deposited energy from the forward shock is found to be important to account for the rising part of the light curve. Although there are differences in detail, SN 2008am appears to be closely related to other super-luminous Type IIn supernovae, SN 2006gy, SN 2006tf and perhaps SN 2008iy, that may represent the deaths of very massive LBV-type progenitors and for which the luminosity is powered by the interaction of the ejecta with a dense circumstellar medium.
The efficient use of Type Ia supernovae (SNIa) for cosmological studies requires knowledge of any parameter that can affect their luminosity in either systematic or statistical ways. Observational samples of SNIa commonly use the metallicity of the host galaxy, Z_host, as an estimator of the supernova progenitor metallicity, Z_Ia, that is one of the primary factors affecting SNIa magnitude. Here, we present a theoretical study of the relationship between Z_Ia and Z_host. We follow the chemical evolution of homogeneous galaxy models together with the evolution of the supernova rates in order to evaluate the metallicity distribution function, MDF(Delta Z), i.e. the probability that the logarithm of the metallicity of a SNIa exploding now differs in less than Delta Z from that of its host. We analyse several model galaxies aimed to represent from active to passive galaxies, including dwarf galaxies prone to experience supernova driven outflows. We analyse the sensitivity of the MDF to uncertain ingredients: IMF, star-formation law, stellar lifetime, stellar yields, and SNIa delay-time distribution. There is a remarkable degree of agreement between the mean Z_Ia in a galaxy and its Z_host when they both are measured as the CNO abundance, especially if the DTD peaks at small time delays, while the average Fe abundance of host and SNIa may differ up to 0.4-0.6 dex in passive galaxies. The dispersion of Z_Ia in active galaxy models is quite small, meaning that Z_host is a quite good estimator of the supernova metallicity. Passive galaxies present a larger dispersion, which is more pronounced in low mass galaxies. We discuss the use of different metallicity indicators: Fe vs. O, and gas-phase metallicity vs. stellar metallicity. The results of the application of our formalism to a galactic catalogue (VESPA) are roughly consistent with our theoretical estimates. (abridged)
We discuss three new equations of state (EOS) in core-collapse supernova simulations. The new EOS are based on the nuclear statistical equilibrium model of Hempel and Schaffner-Bielich (HS), which includes excluded volume effects and relativistic mean-field (RMF) interactions. We consider the RMF parameterizations TM1, TMA, and FSUgold. These EOS are implemented into our spherically symmetric core-collapse supernova model, which is based on general relativistic radiation hydrodynamics and three-flavor Boltzmann neutrino transport. The results obtained for the new EOS are compared with the widely used EOS of H. Shen et al. and Lattimer & Swesty. The systematic comparison shows that the model description of inhomogeneous nuclear matter is as important as the parameterization of the nuclear interactions for the supernova dynamics and the neutrino signal. Furthermore, several new aspects of nuclear physics are investigated: the HS EOS contains distributions of nuclei, including nuclear shell effects. The appearance of light nuclei, e.g., deuterium and tritium is also explored, which can become as abundant as alphas and free protons. In addition, we investigate the black hole formation in failed core-collapse supernovae, which is mainly determined by the high-density EOS. We find that temperature effects lead to a systematically faster collapse for the non-relativistic LS EOS in comparison to the RMF EOS. We deduce a new correlation for the time until black hole formation, which allows to determine the maximum mass of proto-neutron stars, if the neutrino signal from such a failed supernova would be measured in the future. This would give a constraint for the nuclear EOS at finite entropy, complementary to observations of cold neutron stars.
(shortened) The SMC is ideally suited to investigating the recent star formation history from X-ray source population studies. It harbours a large number of Be/X-ray binaries, and the supernova remnants can be easily resolved with imaging X-ray instruments. We search for new supernova remnants in the SMC and in particular for composite remnants with a central X-ray source. We study the morphology of newly found candidate supernova remnants using radio, optical and X-ray images and investigate their X-ray spectra. Here we report on the discovery of the new supernova remnant around the recently discovered Be/X-ray binary pulsar SXP 1062 in radio and X-ray images. The Be/X-ray binary system is found near the centre of the supernova remnant, which is located at the outer edge of the eastern wing of the SMC. The remnant is oxygen-rich, indicating that it developed from a type Ib event. From XMM-Newton observations we find that the neutron star with a spin period of 1062 s shows a very high average spin-down rate of 0.26 s per day over the observing period of 18 days. From the currently accepted models, our estimated age of around 10000-25000 years for the supernova remnant is not long enough to spin down the neutron star from a few 10 ms to its current value. Assuming an upper limit of 25000 years for the age of the neutron star and the extreme case that the neutron star was spun down by the accretion torque that we have measured during the XMM-Newton observations since its birth, a lower limit of 0.5 s for the birth spin period is inferred. For more realistic, smaller long-term average accretion torques our results suggest that the neutron star was born with a correspondingly longer spin period. This implies that neutron stars in Be/X-ray binaries with long spin periods can be much younger than currently anticipated.
The observed distribution of neutron star (NS) masses reflects the physics of core-collapse supernova explosions and the structure of the massive stars that produce them at the end of their evolution. We present a Bayesian analysis that directly compares the NS mass distribution observed in double NS systems to theoretical models of NS formation. We find that models with standard binary mass ratio distributions are strongly preferred over independently picking the masses from the initial mass function, although the strength of the inference depends on whether current assumptions for identifying the remnants of the primary and secondary stars are correct. Second, NS formation models with no mass fallback are favored because they reduce the dispersion in NS masses. The double NS system masses thus directly point to the mass coordinate where the supernova explosion was initiated, making them an excellent probe of the supernova explosion mechanism. If we assume no fallback and simply vary the mass coordinate separating the remnant and the supernova ejecta, we find that for solar metallicity stars the explosion most likely develops at the edge of the iron core at a specific entropy of about 2.8 k_B. The primary limitations of our study are the poor knowledge of the supernova explosion mechanism and the lack of broad range of SN model explosions of LMC to solar metallicity.
We present optical photometry and spectroscopy of five type Ia supernovae discovered by the Nearby Supernova Factory selected to be spectroscopic analogues of the candidate super-Chandrasekhar-mass events SN 2003fg and SN 2007if. Their spectra are characterized by hot, highly ionized photospheres near maximum light, for which SN 1991T supplies the best phase coverage among available close spectral templates. Like SN 2007if, these supernovae are overluminous (-19.5 < M_V < -20) and the velocity of the Si II 6355 absorption minimum is consistent with being constant in time from phases as early as a week before, and up to two weeks after, $B$-band maximum light. We interpret the velocity plateaus as evidence for a reverse-shock shell in the ejecta formed by interaction at early times with a compact envelope of surrounding material, as might be expected for SNe resulting from the mergers of two white dwarfs. We use the bolometric light curves and line velocity evolution of these SNe to estimate important parameters of the progenitor systems, including nickel-56 mass, total progenitor mass, and masses of shells and surrounding carbon/oxygen envelopes. We find that the reconstructed total progenitor mass distribution of the events (including SN 2007if) is bounded from below by the Chandrasekhar mass, with SN 2007if being the most massive. We discuss the relationship of these events to the emerging class of super-Chandrasekhar-mass SNe Ia, estimate the relative rates, compare the mass distribution to that expected for double-degenerate SN Ia progenitors from population synthesis, and consider implications for future cosmological Hubble diagrams.
The paper considers the evolution of the supernova envelopes produced by Population III stars with masses of $M_*\sim 25-200 M_\odot$ located in non-rotating protogalaxies with masses of $M\sim 10^7 M_\odot$ at redshifts $z=12$, with dark-matter density profiles in the form of modified isothermal spheres. The supernova explosion occurs in the ionization zone formed by a single parent star. The properties of the distribution of heavy elements (metals) produced by the parent star are investigated, as well as the efficiency with which they are mixed with the primordial gas in the supernova envelope. In supernovae with high energies ($E\simgt 5\times 10^{52}$ erg), an appreciable fraction of the gas can be ejected from the protogalaxy, but nearly all the heavy elements remain in the protogalaxy. In explosions with lower energies ($E\simlt 3\times 10^{52}$ erg), essentially no gas and heavy elements are lost from the protogalaxy: during the first one to threemillion years, the gas and heavy elements are actively carried from the central region of the protogalaxy ($r\sim 0.1 r_{vir}$, where $r_{vir}$ is the virial radius of the protogalaxy), but an appreciable fraction of the mass of metals subsequently returns when the hot cavity cools and the envelope collapses. Supernovae with high energies ($E\simgt 5\times 10^{52}$ erg) are characterized by a very low efficiency of mixing of metals; their heavy elements are located in the small volume occupied by the disrupted envelope (in a volume comparable with that of the entire envelope), with most of the metals remaining inside the hot, rarified cavity of the envelope. (abridged)
(Abridged) In order to decode the neutrino burst signal from a Galactic core-collapse supernova and reveal the complicated inner workings of the explosion we need a thorough understanding of the neutrino flavor evolution from the proto-neutron star outwards. The flavor content of the signal evolves due to both neutrino collective effects and matter effects which can lead to a highly interesting interplay and distinctive spectral features. In this paper we investigate the supernova neutrino flavor evolution in three different progenitors and include collective flavor effects, the evolution of the Mikheyev, Smirnov & Wolfenstein conversion due to the shock wave passage through the star, and the impact of turbulence. In the Oxygen-Neon-Magnesium supernova we find that the impact of turbulence is both brief and slight during a window of 1-2 seconds post bounce. Thus the spectral features of collective and shock effects in the neutrino signals from ONeMg supernovae may be almost turbulence free making them the easiest to interpret. For the more massive progenitors we again find that small amplitude turbulence, up to 10%, leads to a minimal modification of the signal, and the emerging neutrino spectra retain both collective and MSW features. However, when larger amounts of turbulence is added, 30% and 50%, the features of collective and shock wave effects in the high density resonance channel are almost completely obscured at late times. Yet at the same time we find the other mixing channels - the low density resonance channel and the non-resonant channels - begin to develop turbulence signatures. Large amplitude turbulent motions in the outer layers of more massive, iron core-collapse supernovae may obscure the most obvious fingerprints of collective and shock wave effects in the neutrino signal but cannot remove them completely, and additionally bring about new features in the signal.
Using a sample of 608 Type Ia supernovae from the SDSS-II and BOSS surveys, combined with a sample of foreground galaxies from SDSS-II, we estimate the weak lensing convergence for each supernova line-of-sight. We find that the correlation between this measurement and the Hubble residuals is consistent with the prediction from lensing (at a significance of 1.7sigma. Strong correlations are also found between the residuals and supernova nuisance parameters after a linear correction is applied. When these other correlations are taken into account, the lensing signal is detected at 1.4sigma. We show for the first time that distance estimates from supernovae can be improved when lensing is incorporated by including a new parameter in the SALT2 methodology for determining distance moduli. The recovered value of the new parameter is consistent with the lensing prediction. Using CMB data from WMAP7, H0 data from HST and SDSS BAO measurements, we find the best-fit value of the new lensing parameter and show that the central values and uncertainties on Omega_m and w are unaffected. The lensing of supernovae, while only seen at marginal significance in this low redshift sample, will be of vital importance for the next generation of surveys, such as DES and LSST, which will be systematics dominated.
We present Hubble Space Telescope (HST) observations of the exceptionally bright and luminous Swift gamma-ray burst, GRB 130427A. At z=0.34 this burst affords an excellent opportunity to study the supernova and host galaxy associated with an intrinsically extremely luminous burst ($E_{iso} >10^{54}$ erg): more luminous than any previous GRB with a spectroscopically associated supernova. We use the combination of the image quality, UV capability and and invariant PSF of HST to provide the best possible separation of the afterglow, host and supernova contributions to the observed light ~17 rest-frame days after the burst utilising a host subtraction spectrum obtained 1 year later. Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) grism observations show that the associated supernova, SN~2013cq, has an overall spectral shape and luminosity similar to SN 1998bw (with a photospheric velocity, v$_{ph}$ ~15,000 km/s). The positions of the bluer features are better matched by the higher velocity SN~2010bh (v$_{ph}$ ~ 30,000 km/s), but SN 2010bh is significantly fainter, and fails to reproduce the overall spectral shape, perhaps indicative of velocity structure in the ejecta. We find that the burst originated ~4 kpc from the nucleus of a moderately star forming (1 Msol/yr), possibly interacting disc galaxy. The absolute magnitude, physical size and morphology of this galaxy, as well as the location of the GRB within it are also strikingly similar to those of GRB980425/SN 1998bw. The similarity of supernovae and environment from both the most luminous and least luminous GRBs suggests broadly similar progenitor stars can create GRBs across six orders of magnitude in isotropic energy.
Magnetic spin-down of a millisecond neutron star has been proposed as the power source of hydrogen-poor "superluminous" supernovae (SLSNe-I). However, producing an unambiguous test that can distinguish this model from alternatives, such as circumstellar interaction, has proven challenging. After the supernova explosion, the pulsar wind inflates a hot cavity behind the expanding stellar ejecta: the nascent millisecond pulsar wind nebula. Electron/positron pairs injected by the wind cool through inverse Compton scattering and synchrotron emission, producing a pair cascade and hard X-ray spectrum inside the nebula. These X-rays ionize the inner exposed side of the ejecta, driving an ionization front that propagates outwards with time. Under some conditions this front can breach the ejecta surface within months after the optical supernova peak, allowing ~0.1-1 keV photons to escape the nebula unattenuated with a characteristic luminosity L_X ~ 1e43-1e45 erg/s. This "ionization break-out" may explain the luminous X-ray emission observed from the transient SCP 06F, providing direct evidence that this SLSN was indeed engine-powered. Luminous break-out requires a low ejecta mass and that the spin-down time of the pulsar be comparable to the photon diffusion timescale at optical maximum, the latter condition similar to that required for a supernova with a high optical fluence. These relatively special requirements may explain why most SLSNe-I are not accompanied by detectable X-ray emission. Global asymmetry of the supernova ejecta increases the likelihood of an early break-out along the direction of lowest density. Atomic states with lower threshold energies are more readily ionized at earlier times near optical maximum, allowing UV break-out across a wider range of pulsar and ejecta properties than X-ray break-out, possibly contributing to the blue/UV colors of SLSNe-I.
We study the formation of molecules and dust clusters in the ejecta of solar metallicity, Type II-P supernovae using a chemical kinetic approach. We follow the evolution of molecules and small dust cluster masses from day 100 to day 1500 after explosion. We consider stellar progenitors with initial mass of 12, 15, 19 and 25 Msun that explode as supernovae with stratified ejecta. The molecular precursors to dust grains comprise molecular chains, rings and small clusters of silica, silicates, metal oxides, sulphides and carbides, pure metals, and carbon, where the nucleation of silicate clusters is described by a two-step process of metal and oxygen addition. We study the impact of the 56Ni mass on the type and amount of synthesised dust. We predict that large masses of molecules including CO, SiO, SiS, O2, and SO form in the ejecta. We show that the discrepancy between the small dust masses detected at infrared wavelengths some 500 days post-explosion and the larger amounts of dust recently detected with Herschel in supernova remnants can be explained by the non-equilibrium chemistry linked to the formation of molecules and dust clusters in the ejected material. Dust gradually builds up from small (~10^{-5} Msun) to large masses (~5x 10^{-2} Msun) over a 5 yr period after explosion. Subsequent dust formation and/or growth is hampered by the shortage of chemical agents participating in the dust nucleation and the long time scale for accretion. The results highlight the dependence of the dust chemical composition and mass on the amount of 56Ni synthesised during the explosion. This dependence may partly explain the diversity of epochs at which dust forms in supernovae. More generally, our results indicate that type II-P supernovae are efficient but moderate dust producers with an upper limit on the mass of synthesised dust ranging from ~ 0.03 to 0.09 Msun.
We use N-body simulations of star cluster evolution to explore the hypothesis that short-lived radioactive isotopes found in meteorites, such as 26-Al, were delivered to the Sun's protoplanetary disc from a supernova at the epoch of Solar System formation. We cover a range of star cluster formation parameter space and model both clusters with primordial substructure, and those with smooth profiles. We also adopt different initial virial ratios - from cool, collapsing clusters to warm, expanding associations. In each cluster we place the same stellar population; the clusters each have 2100 stars, and contain one massive 25M_Sun star which is expected to explode as a supernova at about 6.6Myr. We determine the number of Solar (G)-type stars that are within 0.1 - 0.3pc of the 25M_Sun star at the time of the supernova, which is the distance required to enrich the protoplanetary disc with the 26-Al abundances found in meteorites. We then determine how many of these G-dwarfs are unperturbed `singletons'; stars which are never in close binaries, nor suffer sub-100au encounters, and which also do not suffer strong dynamical perturbations.   The evolution of a suite of twenty initially identical clusters is highly stochastic, with the supernova enriching over 10 G-dwarfs in some clusters, and none at all in others. Typically only ~25 per cent of clusters contain enriched, unperturbed singletons, and usually only 1 - 2 per cluster (from a total of 96 G-dwarfs in each cluster). The initial conditions for star formation do not strongly affect the results, although a higher fraction of supervirial (expanding) clusters would contain enriched G-dwarfs if the supernova occurred earlier than 6.6Myr. If we sum together simulations with identical initial conditions, then ~1 per cent of all G-dwarfs in our simulations are enriched, unperturbed singletons.
We present an analysis of the diversity of V-band light-curves of hydrogen-rich type II supernovae. Analyzing a sample of 116 supernovae, several magnitude measurements are defined, together with decline rates at different epochs, and time durations of different phases. It is found that magnitudes measured at maximum light correlate more strongly with decline rates than those measured at other epochs: brighter supernovae at maximum generally have faster declining light-curves at all epochs. We find a relation between the decline rate during the 'plateau' phase and peak magnitudes, which has a dispersion of 0.56 magnitudes, offering the prospect of using type II supernovae as purely photometric distance indicators. Our analysis suggests that the type II population spans a continuum from low-luminosity events which have flat light-curves during the 'plateau' stage, through to the brightest events which decline much faster. A large range in optically thick phase durations is observed, implying a range in progenitor envelope masses at the epoch of explosion. During the radioactive tails, we find many supernovae with faster declining light-curves than expected from full trapping of radioactive emission, implying low mass ejecta. It is suggested that the main driver of light-curve diversity is the extent of hydrogen envelopes retained before explosion. Finally, a new classification scheme is introduced where hydrogen-rich events are typed as simply 'SNII' with an s2 value giving the decline rate during the 'plateau' phase, indicating its morphological type.
Hydrogen-rich Type II-Plateau supernovae exhibit correlations between the plateau luminosity $L_{\rm pl}$, the nickel mass $M_{\rm Ni}$, the explosion energy $E_{\rm exp}$, and the ejecta mass $M_{\rm ej}$. Using our global, self-consistent, multi-band model of nearby well-observed supernovae, we find that the covariances of these quantities are strong and that the confidence ellipsoids are oriented in the direction of the correlations, which reduces their significance. By proper treatment of the covariance matrix of the model, we discover a significant intrinsic width to the correlations between $L_{\rm pl}$, $E_{\rm exp}$, and $M_{\rm Ni}$, where the uncertainties due to the distance and the extinction dominate. For fixed $E_{\rm exp}$, the spread in $M_{\rm Ni}$ is about 0.25 dex, which we attribute to the differences in the progenitor internal structure. We argue that the effects of incomplete $\gamma$-ray trapping are not important in our sample. Similarly, the physics of the Type II-Plateau supernova light curves leads to inherently degenerate estimates of $E_{\rm exp}$ and $M_{\rm ej}$, which makes their observed correlation weak. Ignoring the covariances of supernova parameters or the intrinsic width of the correlations causes significant biases in the slopes of the fitted relations. Our results imply that Type II-Plateau supernova explosions are not described by a single physical parameter or a simple one-dimensional trajectory through the parameter space, but instead reflect the diversity of the core and surface properties of their progenitors. We discuss the implications for the physics of the explosion mechanism and possible future observational constraints.
Motivated by recent hints for sterile neutrinos from the reactor anomaly, we study active-sterile conversions in a three-flavor scenario (2 active + 1 sterile families) for three different representative times during the neutrino-cooling evolution of the proto-neutron star born in an electron-capture supernova. In our "early model" (0.5 s post bounce), the nu_e-nu_s MSW effect driven by Delta m^2=2.35 eV^2 is dominated by ordinary matter and leads to a complete nu_e-nu_s swap with little or no trace of collective flavor oscillations. In our "intermediate" (2.9 s p.b.) and "late models" (6.5 s p.b.), neutrinos themselves significantly modify the nu_e-nu_s matter effect, and, in particular in the late model, nu-nu refraction strongly reduces the matter effect, largely suppressing the overall nu_e-nu_s MSW conversion. This phenomenon has not been reported in previous studies of active-sterile supernova neutrino oscillations. We always include the feedback effect on the electron fraction Y_e due to neutrino oscillations. In all examples, Y_e is reduced and therefore the presence of sterile neutrinos can affect the conditions for heavy-element formation in the supernova ejecta, even if probably not enabling the r-process in the investigated outflows of an electron-capture supernova. The impact of neutrino-neutrino refraction is strong but complicated, leaving open the possibility that with a more complete treatment, or for other supernova models, active-sterile neutrino oscillations could generate conditions suitable for the r-process.
Characterization of the relatively poorly-understood progenitor systems of Type Ia supernovae is of great importance in astrophysics, particularly given the important cosmological role that these supernovae play. Kepler's Supernova Remnant, the result of a Type Ia supernova, shows evidence for an interaction with a dense circumstellar medium (CSM), suggesting a single-degenerate progenitor system. We present 7.5-38 $\mu$m infrared (IR) spectra of the remnant, obtained with the {\it Spitzer Space Telescope}, dominated by emission from warm dust. Broad spectral features at 10 and 18 $\mu$m, consistent with various silicate particles, are seen throughout. These silicates were likely formed in the stellar outflow from the progenitor system during the AGB stage of evolution, and imply an oxygen-rich chemistry. In addition to silicate dust, a second component, possibly carbonaceous dust, is necessary to account for the short-wavelength IRS and IRAC data. This could imply a mixed chemistry in the atmosphere of the progenitor system. However, non-spherical metallic iron inclusions within silicate grains provide an alternative solution. Models of collisionally-heated dust emission from fast shocks ($>$ 1000 km s$^{-1}$) propagating into the CSM can reproduce the majority of the emission associated with non-radiative filaments, where dust temperatures are $\sim 80-100$ K, but fail to account for the highest temperatures detected, in excess of 150 K. We find that slower shocks (a few hundred km s$^{-1}$) into moderate density material ($n_{0} \sim 50-250$ cm$^{-3}$) are the only viable source of heating for this hottest dust. We confirm the finding of an overall density gradient, with densities in the north being an order of magnitude greater than those in the south.
It is now well established that Kepler's supernova remnant is the result of a Type Ia explosion. With an age of 407 years, and an angular diameter of ~ 4', Kepler is estimated to be between 3.0 and 7.0 kpc distant. Unlike other Galactic Type Ia supernova remnants such as Tycho and SN 1006, and SNR 0509-67.5 in the Large Magellanic Cloud, Kepler shows evidence for a strong circumstellar interaction. A bowshock structure in the north is thought to originate from the motion of a mass-losing system through the interstellar medium prior to the supernova. We present results of hydrodynamical and spectral modeling aimed at constraining the circumstellar environment of the system and the amount of 56Ni produced in the explosion. Using models that contain either 0.3 M_sun (subenergetic) or 1 M_sun (energetic) of 56Ni, we simulate the interaction between supernova Ia ejecta and various circumstellar density models. Based on dynamical considerations alone, we find that the subenergetic models favor a distance to the SNR of < 6.4 kpc, while the model that produces 1 M_sun of 56Ni requires a distance to the SNR of > 7 kpc. The X-ray spectrum is consistent with an explosion that produced ~ 1 M_sun of 56Ni, ruling out the subenergetic models, and suggesting that Kepler's SNR was a SN 1991T-like event. Additionally, the X-ray spectrum rules out a pure 1/r^2 wind profile expected from isotropic mass loss up to the time of the supernova. Introducing a small cavity around the progenitor system results in modeled X-ray spectra that are consistent with the observed spectrum. If a wind shaped circumstellar environment is necessary to explain the dynamics and X-ray emission from the shocked ejecta in Kepler's SNR, then we require that the distance to the remnant be greater than 7 kpc.
We report the X-ray detection of the Type II-plateau supernova SN 2004et in the spiral galaxy NGC 6946, using the Chandra X-Ray Observatory. The position of the X-ray source was found to agree with the optical position within ~0.4 arcsec. Chandra also surveyed the region before the 2004 event, finding no X-ray emission at the location of the progenitor. For the post-explosion observations, a total of 202, 151, and 158 photons were detected in three pointings, each ~29 ks in length, on 2004 October 22, November 6, and December 3, respectively. The spectrum of the first observation is best fit by a thermal model with a temperature of kT=1.3 keV and a line-of-sight absorption of N_H=1.0 x 10^{22} cm^{-2}. The inferred unabsorbed luminosity (0.4-8 keV) is ~4x10^{38} erg/s, adopting a distance of 5.5 Mpc. A comparison between hard and soft counts on the first and third epochs indicates a softening over this time, although there is an insufficient number of photons to constrain the variation of temperature and absorption by spectral fitting. We model the emission as arising from the reverse shock region in the interaction between the supernova ejecta and the progenitor wind. For a Type IIP supernova with an extended progenitor, the cool shell formed at the time of shock wave breakout from the star can affect the initial evolution of the interaction shell and the absorption of radiation from the reverse shock. The observed spectral softening might be due to decreasing shell absorption. We find a pre-supernova mass loss rate of (2-2.5)x 10^{-6} M_{\odot} /yr for a wind velocity of 10 kms, which is in line with expectations for a Type IIP supernova.
We present the results of an eight-year long monitoring of the radio emission from the Luminous Infrared Galaxy (LIRG) NGC 7469, using 8.4 GHz Very Large Array (VLA) observations at 0.3'' resolution. Our monitoring shows that the late time evolution of the radio supernova SN 2000ft follows a decline very similar to that displayed at earlier times of its optically thin phase. The late time radio emission of SN 2000ft is therefore still being powered by its interaction with the presupernova stellar wind, and not with the interstellar medium (ISM). Indeed, the ram pressure of the presupernova wind is \rho_w v_w^2 \approx 7.6E-9 dyn/cm^2, at a supernova age of approximately 2127 days, which is significantly larger than the expected pressure of the ISM around SN 2000ft. At this age, the SN shock has reached a distance r_{sh \approx 0.06 pc, and our observations are probing the interaction of the SN with dense material that was ejected by the presupernova star about 5820 years prior to its explosion. From our VLA monitoring, we estimate that the swept-up mass by the supernova shock after about six years of expansion is \approx 0.29 M_sun, assuming an average expansion speed of the supernova of 10000 km/s.   We also searched for recently exploded core-collapse supernovae in our VLA images. Apart from SN 2000ft (S_\nu \approx 1760 microJy at its peak, corresponding to 1.1E28 erg/s/Hz, we found no evidence for any other radio supernova (RSN) more luminous than \approx 6.0E26 erg/s/Hz, which suggests that no other Type IIn SN has exploded since 2000 in the circumnuclear starburst of NGC 7469.
Galaxy-galaxy interactions are expected to be responsible for triggering massive star formation and possibly accretion onto a supermassive black hole, by providing large amounts of dense molecular gas down to the central kiloparsec region. Several scenarios to drive the gas further down to the central ~100 pc, have been proposed, including the formation of a nuclear disk around the black hole, where massive stars would produce supernovae. Here, we probe the radial distribution of supernovae and supernova remnants in the nuclear regions of the starburst galaxies M82, Arp 299-A, and Arp 220, by using high-angular resolution (< 0."1) radio observations published in the literature (for M82 and Arp 220), or obtained by ourselves from the European VLBI Network (Arp 299-A). Our main goal was to characterize the nuclear starbursts in those galaxies and thus test scenarios that propose that nuclear disks of sizes ~100 pc form in the central regions of starburst galaxies. We obtained the radial distribution of supernovae (SNe) in the nuclear starbursts of M82, Arp 299-A, and Arp 220, and derived scale-length values for the putative nuclear disks powering the bursts in those central regions. The scale lengths for the (exponential) disks range from ~20-30 pc for Arp 299-A and Arp 220, up to ~140 pc for M82. The radial distribution of SNe for the nuclear disks in Arp 299-A and Arp 220 is also consistent with a power-law surface density profile of exponent gamma=1, as expected from detailed hydrodynamical simulations of nuclear disks. Our results support scenarios where a nuclear disk of size ~100 pc is formed in (U)LIRGs, and sustained by gas pressure, in which case the accretion onto the black hole could be lowered by supernova feedback.
It is widely recognized that nucleosynthetic output of the first, Population III supernovae was a catalyst defining the character of subsequent stellar generations. Most of the work on the earliest enrichment was carried out assuming that the first stars were extremely massive and that the associated supernovae were unusually energetic, enough to completely unbind the baryons in the host cosmic minihalo and disperse the synthesized metals into the intergalactic medium. Recent work, however, suggests that the first stars may in fact have been somewhat less massive, with a characteristic mass scale of a few tens of solar masses. We present a cosmological simulation following the transport of the metals synthesized in a Population III supernova assuming that it had an energy of 1e51 ergs, compatible with standard Type II supernovae. A young supernova remnant is inserted in the first star's relic HII region in the free expansion phase and is followed for 40 Myr employing adaptive mesh refinement and Lagrangian tracer particle techniques. The supernova remnant remains partially trapped within the minihalo and the thin snowplow shell develops pronounced instability and fingering. Roughly half of the ejecta turn around and fall back toward the center of the halo, with 1% of the ejecta reaching the center in 30 kyr and 10% in 10 Myr. The average metallicity of the combined returning ejecta and the pristine filaments feeding into the halo center from the cosmic web is 0.001 - 0.01 Z_sun, but the two remain unmixed until accreting onto the central hydrostatic core that is unresolved at the end of the simulation. We conclude that if Population III stars had less extreme masses, they promptly enriched the host minihalos with metals and triggered Population II star formation.
The relative importance of metals and dust grains in the formation of the first low-mass stars has been a subject of debate. The recently discovered Galactic halo star SDSS J102915+172927 (Caffau et al. 2011) has a mass less than 0.8 Msun and a metallicity of Z = 4.5 10^{-5} Zsun. We investigate the origin and properties of this star by reconstructing the physical conditions in its birth cloud. We show that the observed elemental abundance trend of SDSS J102915+172927 can be well fitted by the yields of core-collapse supernovae with metal-free progenitors of 20 Msun and 35 Msun. Using these selected supernova explosion models, we compute the corresponding dust yields and the resulting dust depletion factor taking into account the partial destruction by the supernova reverse shock. We then follow the collapse and fragmentation of a star forming cloud enriched by the products of these SN explosions at the observed metallicity of SDSS J102915+172927. We find that [0.05 - 0.1] Msun mass fragments, which then lead to the formation of low-mass stars, can occur provided that the mass fraction of dust grains in the birth cloud exceeds 0.01 of the total mass of metals and dust. This, in turn, requires that at least 0.4 Msun of dust condense in the first supernovae, allowing for moderate destruction by the reverse shock. If dust formation in the first supernovae is less efficient or strong dust destruction does occur, the thermal evolution of the SDSS J102915+172927 birth cloud is dominated by molecular cooling, and only > 8 Msun fragments can form. We conclude that the observed properties of SDSS J102915+172927 support the suggestion that dust must have condensed in the ejecta of the first supernovae and played a fundamental role in the formation of the first low-mass stars.
The first supernova explosions are potentially relevant sources for the production of the first large-scale magnetic fields. For this reason we present a set of high resolution simulations studying the effect of supernova explosions on magnetized, primordial halos. We focus on the evolution of an initially small-scale magnetic field formed during the collapse of the halo. We vary the degree of magnetization, the halo mass, and the amount of explosion energy in order to account for expected variations as well as to infer systematical dependencies of the results on initial conditions. Our simulations suggest that core collapse supernovae with an explosion energy of 10^51 erg and more violent pair instability supernovae with 10^53 erg are able to disrupt halos with masses up to a about 10^6 and 10^7 M_sun, respectively. The peak of the magnetic field spectra shows a continuous shift towards smaller k-values, i.e. larger length scales, over time reaching values as low as k = 4. On small scales the magnetic energy decreases at the cost of the energy on large scales resulting in a well-ordered magnetic field with a strength up to ~ 10^-8 G depending on the initial conditions. The coherence length of the magnetic field inferred from the spectra reaches values up to 250 pc in agreement with those obtained from autocorrelation functions. We find the coherence length to be as large as $50\%$ of the radius of the supernova bubble. Extrapolating this relation to later stages we suggest that significantly strong magnetic fields with coherence lengths as large as 1.5 kpc could be created. We discuss possible implications of our results on processes like recollapse of the halo, first galaxy formation, and the magnetization of the intergalactic medium.
Nucleosynthesis, light curves, explosion energies, and remnant masses are calculated for a grid of supernovae resulting from massive stars with solar metallicity and masses from 9.0 to 120 solar masses. The full evolution is followed using an adaptive reaction network of up to 2000 nuclei. A novel aspect of the survey is the use of a one-dimensional neutrino transport model for the explosion. This explosion model has been calibrated to give the observed energy for SN 1987A, using several standard progenitors, and for the Crab supernova using a 9.6 solar mass progenitor. As a result of using a calibrated central engine, the final kinetic energy of the supernova is variable and sensitive to the structure of the presupernova star. Many progenitors with extended core structures do not explode, but become black holes, and the masses of exploding stars do not form a simply connected set. The resulting nucleosynthesis agrees reasonably well with the sun provided that a reasonable contribution from Type Ia supernovae is also allowed, but with a deficiency of light s-process isotopes. The resulting neutron star IMF has a mean gravitational mass near 1.4 solar masses. The average black hole mass is about 9 solar masses if only the helium core implodes, and 14 solar masses if the entire presupernova star collapses. Only ~10% of supernovae come from stars over 20 solar masses and some of these are Type Ib or Ic. Some useful systematics of Type IIp light curves are explored.
We perform two-dimensional axisymmetric hydrodynamic simulations of matter mixing in aspherical core-collapse supernova explosions of a 16.3 $M_{\odot}$ star with a compact hydrogen envelope. Observations of SN 1987A have provided evidence that $^{56}$Ni synthesized by explosive nucleosynthesis is mixed into fast moving matter ($\gtrsim$ 3,500 km s$^{-1}$) in the exploding star. In order to clarify the key conditions for reproducing such high velocity of $^{56}$Ni, we revisit matter mixing in aspherical core-collapse supernova explosions. Explosions are initiated artificially by injecting thermal and kinetic energies around the interface between the iron core and the silicon-rich layer. Perturbations of 5% or 30% amplitude in the radial velocities are introduced at several points in time. We found that no high velocity $^{56}$Ni can be obtained if we consider bipolar explosions with perturbations (5% amplitude) of pre-supernova origins. If large perturbations (30% amplitude) are introduced or exist due to some unknown mechanism in a later phase just before the shock wave reaches the hydrogen envelope, $^{56}$Ni with a velocity of 3,000 km s$^{-1}$ can be obtained. Aspherical explosions that are asymmetric across the equatorial plane with clumpy structures in the initial shock waves are investigated. We found that the clump sizes affect the penetration of $^{56}$Ni. Finally, we report that an aspherical explosion model that is asymmetric across the equatorial plane with multiple perturbations of pre-supernova origins can cause the penetration of $^{56}$Ni clumps into fast moving matter of 3,000 km s$^{-1}$. We show that both aspherical explosion with clumpy structures and perturbations of pre-supernova origins may be necessary to reproduce the observed high velocity of $^{56}$Ni. To confirm this, more robust three-dimensional simulations are required.
In 1964, Refsdal hypothesized that a supernova whose light traversed multiple paths around a strong gravitational lens could be used to measure the rate of cosmic expansion. We report the discovery of such a system. In Hubble Space Telescope imaging, we have found four images of a single supernova forming an Einstein cross configuration around a redshift z=0.54 elliptical galaxy in the MACS J1149.6+2223 cluster. The cluster's gravitational potential also creates multiple images of the z=1.49 spiral supernova host galaxy, and a future appearance of the supernova elsewhere in the cluster field is expected. The magnifications and staggered arrivals of the supernova images probe the cosmic expansion rate, as well as the distribution of matter in the galaxy and cluster lenses.
We present all X-ray and radio observations of the Type IIn supernova SN 2010jl. The X-ray observations cover a period up to day 1500 with Chandra, XMM-Newton, NuSTAR and Swift-XRT. The Chandra observations after 2012 June, the XMM-Newton observation in 2013 November, and most of the Swift-XRT observations until 2014 December are presented for the first time. All the spectra can be fitted by an absorbed hot thermal model except for \chandra spectra on 2011 October and 2012 June when an additional component is needed. Although the origin of this component is uncertain, it is spatially coincident with the supernova and occurs when there are changes to the supernova spectrum in the energy range close to that of the extra component, indicating that the emission is related to the supernova. The X-ray light curve shows an initial plateau followed by a steep drop starting at day $\sim 300$. We attribute the drop to a decrease in the circumstellar density. The column density to the X-ray emission drops rapidly with time, showing that the absorption is in the vicinity of the supernova. We also present Very Large Array radio observations of SN 2010jl. Radio emission was detected from \sn from day 570 onwards. The radio light curves and spectra suggest that the radio luminosity was close to its maximum at the first detection. The velocity of the shocked ejecta derived assuming synchrotron self absorption is much less than that estimated from the optical and X-ray observations, suggesting that free-free absorption dominates.
Neutrinos play a crucial role in the collapse and explosion of massive stars, governing the infall dynamics of the stellar core, triggering and fueling the explosion and driving the cooling and deleptonization of the newly formed neutron star. Due to their role neutrinos carry information from the heart of the explosion and, due to their weakly interacting nature, offer the only direct probe of the dynamics and thermodynamics at the center of a supernova. In this paper, we review the present status of modelling the neutrino physics and signal formation in collapsing and exploding stars. We assess the capability of current and planned large underground neutrino detectors to yield faithful information of the time and flavor dependent neutrino signal from a future Galactic supernova. We show how the observable neutrino burst would provide a benchmark for fundamental supernova physics with unprecedented richness of detail. Exploiting the treasure of the measured neutrino events requires a careful discrimination of source-generated properties from signal features that originate on the way to the detector. As for the latter, we discuss self-induced flavor conversions associated with neutrino-neutrino interactions that occur in the deepest stellar regions; matter effects that modify the pattern of flavor conversions in the dynamical stellar envelope; neutrino-oscillation signatures that result from structural features associated with the shock-wave propagation as well as turbulent mass motions in post-shock layers. Finally, we highlight our current understanding of the formation of the diffuse supernova neutrino background and we analyse the perspectives for a detection of this relic signal that integrates the contributions from all past core-collapse supernovae in the Universe.
The presence of neutral hydrogen in the shock proximity changes the structure of the shock and affects the spectra of particles accelerated through the first-order Fermi mechanism. This phenomenon has profound implications for the interpretation of the multifrequency spectra of radiation from supernova remnants. Neutrals that undergo charge exchange with hot ions downstream of the shock may result in fast neutrals moving towards the upstream gas, where they can suffer additional charge exchange or ionisation reactions, thereby depositing energy and momentum upstream. Here we discuss the implications of this neutral return flux, which was already predicted in our previous work on neutral mediated supernova shocks, and show how the spectra of accelerated particles turn out to be appreciably steeper than $p^{-4}$, thereby affecting the gamma ray spectra from supernova remnants in general and from Tycho specifically. The theory that describes non-linear diffusive shock acceleration in the presence of neutral hydrogen has been developed in recent years. Here we use a semi-analytical theory developed in previous work and specialise our predictions to the case of the Tycho supernova shock, where there is evidence that the spectrum of the accelerated cosmic rays is steeper than expected from the traditional theory of diffusive shock acceleration. We show that, if the fraction of neutral hydrogen in the vicinity of the Tycho supernova shock is, as suggested by observations, ~70-90, then spectra of accelerated protons steeper than $p^{-4}$ may be a natural consequence of charge exchange reactions and the associated neutral return flux. The spectral shape is affected by this phenomenon for particles with energies below ~100-1000 GeV, for which the diffusion length is less than or at most comparable to the pathlength of charge exchange and ionisation upstream of the shock.
We present a compilation of UBV RIz light curves of 51 type II supernovae discovered during the course of four different surveys during 1986 to 2003: the Cerro Tololo Supernova Survey, the Calan/Tololo Supernova Program (C&T), the Supernova Optical and Infrared Survey (SOIRS), and the Carnegie Type II Supernova Survey (CATS). The photometry is based on template-subtracted images to eliminate any potential host galaxy light contamination, and calibrated from foreground stars. This work presents these photometric data, studies the color evolution using different bands, and explores the relation between the magnitude at maximum brightness and the brightness decline parameter (s) from maximum light through the end of the recombination phase. This parameter is found to be shallower for redder bands and appears to have the best correlation in the B band. In addition, it also correlates with the plateau duration, being thus shorter (longer) for larger (smaller) s values.
Calculations of synthetic spectropolarimetry are one means to test multi-dimensional explosion models for Type Ia supernovae. In a recent paper, we demonstrated that the violent merger of a 1.1 and 0.9 M$_{\odot}$ white dwarf binary system is too asymmetric to explain the low polarization levels commonly observed in normal Type Ia supernovae. Here, we present polarization simulations for two alternative scenarios: the sub-Chandrasekhar mass double-detonation and the Chandrasekhar mass delayed-detonation model. Specifically, we study a two-dimensional double-detonation model and a three-dimensional delayed-detonation model, and calculate polarization spectra for multiple observer orientations in both cases. We find modest polarization levels ($<$ 1 per cent) for both explosion models. Polarization in the continuum peaks at $\sim$ 0.1$-$0.3 per cent and decreases after maximum light, in excellent agreement with spectropolarimetric data of normal Type Ia supernovae. Higher degrees of polarization are found across individual spectral lines. In particular, the synthetic Si ii {\lambda}6355 profiles are polarized at levels that match remarkably well the values observed in normal Type Ia supernovae, while the low degrees of polarization predicted across the O i {\lambda}7774 region are consistent with the non-detection of this feature in current data. We conclude that our models can reproduce many of the characteristics of both flux and polarization spectra for well-studied Type Ia supernovae, such as SN 2001el and SN 2012fr. However, the two models considered here cannot account for the unusually high level of polarization observed in extreme cases such as SN 2004dt.
Recent 60Fe results have suggested that the estimated distances of supernovae in the last few million years should be reduced from 100 pc to 50 pc. Two events or series of events are suggested, one about 2.7 million years to 1.7 million years ago, and another may at 6.5 to 8.7 million years ago. We ask what effects such supernovae are expected to have on the terrestrial atmosphere and biota. Assuming that the Local Bubble was formed before the event being considered, and that the supernova and the Earth were both inside a weak, disordered magnetic field at that time, TeV-PeV cosmic rays at Earth will increase by a factor of a few hundred. Tropospheric ionization will increase proportionately, and the overall muon radiation load on terrestrial organisms will increase by a factor of 150. All return to pre-burst levels within 10kyr. In the case of an ordered magnetic field, effects depend strongly on the field orientation. The upper bound in this case is with a largely coherent field aligned along the line of sight to the supernova, in which case TeV-PeV cosmic ray flux increases are 10^4; in the case of a transverse field they are below current levels. We suggest a substantial increase in the extended effects of supernovae on Earth and in the lethal distance estimate; more work is needed.This paper is an explicit followup to Thomas et al. (2016). We also here provide more detail on the computational procedures used in both works.
The discovery of radionuclides like 60Fe with half-lives of million years in deep-sea crusts and sediments offers the unique possibility to date and locate nearby supernovae. We want to quantitatively establish that the 60Fe enhancement is the result of several supernovae which are also responsible for the formation of the Local Bubble, our Galactic habitat. We performed three-dimensional hydrodynamic adaptive mesh refinement simulations (with resolutions down to subparsec scale) of the Local Bubble and the neighbouring Loop I superbubble in different homogeneous, self-gravitating environments. For setting up the Local and Loop I superbubble, we took into account the time sequence and locations of the generating core-collapse supernova explosions, which were derived from the mass spectrum of the perished members of certain stellar moving groups. The release of 60Fe and its subsequent turbulent mixing process inside the superbubble cavities was followed via passive scalars, where the yields of the decaying radioisotope were adjusted according to recent stellar evolution calculations. The models are able to reproduce both the timing and the intensity of the 60Fe excess observed with rather high precision, provided that the external density does not exceed 0.3 cm-3 on average. Thus the two best-fit models presented here were obtained with background media mimicking the classical warm ionised and warm neutral medium. We also found that 60Fe (which is condensed onto dust grains) can be delivered to Earth via two physical mechanisms: either through individual fast-paced supernova blast waves, which cross the Earth's orbit sometimes even twice as a result of reflection from the Local Bubble's outer shell, or, alternatively, through the supershell of the Local Bubble itself, injecting the 60Fe content of all previous supernovae at once, but over a longer time range.
The fraction of hydrogen ionizing photons escaping from galaxies into the intergalactic medium is a critical ingredient in the theory of reionization. We use two zoomed-in, high-resolution (4 pc), cosmological radiation hydrodynamic simulations with adaptive mesh refinement to investigate the impact of two physical mechanisms (supernova feedback and runaway OB stars) on the escape fraction (f_esc) at the epoch of reionization (z>7). We implement a new, physically motivated supernova feedback model that can approximate the Sedov solutions at all (from the free expansion to snowplow) stages. We find that there is a significant time delay of about ten million years between the peak of star formation and that of escape fraction, due to the time required for the build-up and subsequent destruction of the star-forming cloud by supernova feedback. Consequently, the photon number-weighted mean escape fraction for dwarf galaxies in halos of mass 10^8-10^10.5 Msun is found to be <fesc>~11%, although instantaneous values of f_esc>20% are common when star formation is strongly modulated by the supernova explosions. We find that the inclusion of runaway OB stars increases the mean escape fraction by 22% to <fesc>~14%. As supernovae resulting from runaway OB stars tend to occur in less dense environments, the feedback effect is enhanced and star formation is further suppressed in halos with Mvir>10^9 Msun in the simulation with runaway OB stars compared with the model without them. While both our models produce enough ionizing photons to maintain a fully ionized universe at z>7 as observed, a still higher amount of ionizing photons at z>9 appears necessary to accommodate the high observed electron optical depth inferred from cosmic microwave background observations.
Context. While searching the NRAO VLA Sky Survey (NVSS) for diffuse radio emission, we have serendipitously discovered extended radio emission close to the Galactic plane. The radio morphology suggests the presence of a previously unknown Galactic supernova remnant. An unclassified {\gamma}-ray source detected by EGRET (3EG J1744-3934) is present in the same location and may stem from the interaction between high-speed particles escaping the remnant and the surrounding interstellar medium.   Aims. Our aim is to confirm the presence of a previously unknown supernova remnant and to determine a possible association with the {\gamma}-ray emission 3EG J1744-3934.   Methods. We have conducted optical and radio follow-ups of the target using the Dark Energy Camera (DECam) on the Blanco telescope at Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory (CTIO) and the Giant Meterwave Radio Telescope (GMRT). We then combined these data with archival radio and {\gamma}-ray observations.   Results. While we detected the extended emission in four different radio bands (325, 1400, 2417, and 4850 MHz), no optical counterpart has been identified. Given its morphology and brightness, it is likely that the radio emission is caused by an old supernova remnant no longer visible in the optical band. Although an unclassified EGRET source is co-located with the supernova remnant, Fermi-LAT data do not show a significant {\gamma}-ray excess that is correlated with the radio emission. However, in the radial distribution of the {\gamma}-ray events, a spatially extended feature is related with SNR at a confidence level $\sim 1.5$ {\sigma}.   Conclusions. We classify the newly discovered extended emission in the radio band as the old remnant of a previously unknown Galactic supernova: SNR G351.0-5.4.
Here we revisit line identifications of type I supernovae and highlight trace amounts of unburned hydrogen as an important free parameter for the composition of the progenitor. Most 1-dimensional stripped-envelope models of supernovae indicate that observed features near 6000-6400 Ang in type I spectra are due to more than Si II 6355. However, while an interpretation of conspicuous Si II 6355 can approximate 6150 Ang absorption features for all type Ia supernovae during the first month of free expansion, similar identifications applied to 6250 Ang features of type Ib and Ic supernovae have not been as successful. When the corresponding synthetic spectra are compared to high quality time-series observations, the computed spectra are frequently too blue in wavelength. Some improvement can be achieved with Fe II lines that contribute red-ward of 6150 Ang, however the computed spectra either remain too blue, or the spectrum only reaches fair agreement when the rise-time to peak brightness of the model conflicts with observations by a factor of two. This degree of disagreement brings into question the proposed explosion scenario. Similarly, a detection of strong Si II 6355 in the spectra of broad-lined Ic and super-luminous events of type I/R is less convincing despite numerous model spectra used to show otherwise. Alternatively, we suggest 6000-6400 Ang features are possibly influenced by either trace amounts of hydrogen, or blue-shifted absorption and emission in Halpha, the latter being an effect which is frequently observed in the spectra of hydrogen-rich, type II supernovae.
Despite their use as cosmological distance indicators and their importance in the chemical evolution of galaxies, the unequivocal identification of the progenitor systems and explosion mechanism of normal type Ia supernova (SN Ia) remains elusive. The leading hypothesis is that such a supernova is a thermonuclear explosion of a carbon-oxygen white dwarf, but the exact explosion mechanism is still a matter of debate. Observation of a galactic SN Ia would be of immense value in answering the many open questions related to these events. One potentially useful source of information about the explosion mechanism and progenitor is the neutrino signal.   In this paper we compute the expected neutrino signal from a gravitationally confined detonation (GCD) explosion scenario for a SN~Ia and show how the flux at Earth contains features in time and energy unique to this scenario. We then calculate the expected event rates in the Super-K, Hyper-K, JUNO, DUNE, and IceCube detectors and find both Hyper-K and IceCube would see a few events for a GCD supernova at 1 kpc or closer, while Super-K, JUNO, and DUNE would see a events if the supernova were closer than ${\sim}0.3$ kpc. The distance and detector criteria needed to resolve the time and spectral features arising from the explosion mechanism, neutrino production, and neutrino oscillation processes are also discussed.   The neutrino signal from the GCD is then compared with the signal from a deflagration-to-detonation transition (DDT) explosion model computed previously. We find the overall event rate is the most discriminating feature between the two scenarios followed by the event rate time structure. Using the event rate in the Hyper-K detector alone, the DDT can be distinguished from the GCD at 2$\sigma$ if the distance to the supernova is less than $2.3\;{\rm kpc}$ for a normal mass ordering and $3.6\;{\rm kpc}$ for an inverted ordering.
We examine the nucleosynthesis in the innermost, neutrino-processed ejecta (a few $10^{-3}\,M_\odot$) of self-consistent, two-dimensional explosion models of core-collapse supernovae for six progenitor stars with different initial masses. Three models have initial masses near the low-mass end of the supernova range, $8.8\,M_\odot$ (e8.8; electron-capture supernova), $9.6\,M_\odot$ (z9.6), and $8.1\,M_\odot$ (u8.1), with initial metallicities of 1, 0, and $10^{-4}$ times the solar metallicity, respectively. The other three are solar-metallicity models with initial masses of $11.2\,M_\odot$ (s11), $15\,M_\odot$ (s15), and $27\,M_\odot$ (s27). The low-mass models e8.8, z9.6, and u8.1 exhibit high production factors (nucleosynthetic abundances relative to the solar ones) of 100--200 for light trans-iron elements from Zn to Zr. This is associated with appreciable ejection of neutron-rich matter in these models. Remarkably, the nucleosynthetic outcomes for progenitors e8.8 and z9.6 are almost identical, including interesting productions of $^{48}$Ca and $^{60}$Fe, irrespective of their quite different (O-Ne-Mg and Fe) cores prior to collapse. In the more massive models s11, s15, and s27, several proton-rich isotopes of light trans-iron elements, including the $p$-isotope $^{92}$Mo (for s27) are made, up to production factors of $\sim$30. Both electron-capture and core-collapse supernovae near the low-mass end can therefore be dominant contributors to the Galactic inventory of light trans-iron elements from Zn to Zr and probably $^{48}$Ca and live $^{60}$Fe. The innermost ejecta of more massive supernovae may have only sub-dominant contributions to the chemical enrichment of the Galaxy except for $^{92}$Mo.
Type IIP supernova progenitors are often surrounded by dense circumstellar media that may result from mass-loss enhancement of the progenitors shortly before their explosions. Previous light-curve studies suggest that the mass-loss rates are enhanced up to ~ 0.1 Msun/yr, assuming a constant wind velocity. However, density of circumstellar media at the immediate stellar vicinity can be much higher than previously inferred for a given mass-loss rate if wind acceleration is taken into account. We show that the wind acceleration has a huge impact when we estimate mass-loss rates from early light curves of Type IIP supernovae by taking SN 2013fs as an example. We perform numerical calculations of the interaction between supernova ejecta and circumstellar media with a constant mass-loss rate but with a beta-law wind velocity profile. We find that the mass-loss rate of the progenitor of SN 2013fs shortly before the explosion, which was inferred to be ~ 0.1 Msun/yr with a constant wind velocity of 10 km/s by a previous light-curve modeling, can be as low as ~ 1e-3 Msun/yr with the same terminal wind velocity of 10 km/s but with a wind velocity profile with beta ~ 5. In both cases, the mass of the circumstellar medium is similar (~ 0.5 Msun). Therefore, the beginning of the progenitor's mass-loss enhancement in our interpretation is ~ 100 years before the explosion, not several years. Our result indicates that the immediate dense environment of Type II supernova progenitors may be significantly influenced by wind acceleration.
The first phase of the Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP-I) was a dedicated supernova follow-up program based at the Las Campanas Observatory that collected science data of young, low-redshift supernovae between 2004 and 2009. Presented in this paper is the CSP-I photometric data release of low-redshift stripped-envelope core-collapse supernovae. The data consist of optical (uBgVri) photometry of 34 objects, with a subset of 26 having near-infrared (YJH) photometry. Twenty objects have optical pre-maximum coverage with a subset of 12 beginning at least five days prior to the epoch of B-band maximum brightness. In the near-infrared, 17 objects have pre-maximum observations with a subset of 14 beginning at least five days prior to the epoch of J-band maximum brightness. Analysis of this photometric data release is presented in companion papers focusing on techniques to estimate host-galaxy extinction (Stritzinger et al., submitted) and the light-curve and progenitor star properties of the sample (Taddia et al., submitted). The analysis of an accompanying visual-wavelength spectroscopy sample of ~150 spectra will be the subject of a future paper.
Binary black-holes (BHs) and binary neutron-stars (NSs) mergers had been recently detected through gravitational-wave (GW) emission, with the latter followed by post-merger electromagnetic counterparts, appearing seconds up to weeks after the merger. While post-merger electromagnetic counterparts had been anticipated theoretically, very little electromagnetic precursors to GW-sources had been proposed, and non observed yet. Here we show that a fraction of ${\rm a}\,{\rm few\times}10^{-4}-10^{-1}$ of LIGO GW-sources and short-GRBs, could be preceded by supernovae-explosions years up to decades before the merger. Each of the BH/NS-progenitors in GW-sources are thought to form following a supernova, likely accompanied by a natal velocity-kick to the newly born compact object. The evolution and natal-kicks determine the orbits of surviving binaries, and hence the delay-time between the birth of the compact-binary and its final merger through GW-emission. We use data from binary evolution population-synthesis models to show that the delay-time distribution has a non-negligible tail of ultra-short delay-times between 1-100 yrs, thereby giving rise to potentially observable supernovae precursors to GW-sources. Moreover, future LISA/DECIGO GW space-detectors will enable the detection of GW-inspirals in the pre-mergers stage weeks to decades before the final merger. These ultra-short delay-time sources could therefore produce a unique type of promptly appearing LISA/DECIGO-GW-sources accompanied by \emph{coincident} supernovae. The archival (and/or direct) detection of precursor (coincident) SNe with GW and/or short-GRBs will provide unprecedented characterizations of the merging-binaries, and their prior evolution through supernovae and natal kicks, otherwise inaccessible through other means.
We present our analysis of the Type II supernova DLT16am (SN~2016ija). The object was discovered during the ongoing $\rm{D}<40\,\rm{Mpc}$ (DLT40) one day cadence supernova search at $r\sim20.1\,\rm{mag}$ in the `edge-on' nearby ($D=20.0\pm1.9\,\rm{Mpc}$) galaxy NGC~1532. The subsequent prompt and high-cadenced spectroscopic and photometric follow-up revealed a highly extincted transient, with $E(B-V)=1.95\pm0.15\,\rm{mag}$, consistent with a standard extinction law with $R_V=3.1$ and a bright ($M_V=-18.49\pm0.65\,\rm{mag}$) absolute peak-magnitude. The comparison of the photometric features with those of large samples of Type II supernovae reveals a fast rise for the derived luminosity and a relatively short plateau phase, with a slope of $S_{50V}=0.84\pm0.04\,\rm{mag}/50\,\rm{d}$ consistent with the photometric properties typical of those of fast declining Type II supernovae. Despite the large uncertainties on the distance and the extinction in the direction of DLT16am, the measured photospheric expansion velocity and the derived absolute $V$-band magnitude at $\sim50\,\rm{d}$ after the explosion match the existing luminosity-velocity relation for Type II supernovae.
We compare elemental abundance patterns of $\sim 200$ extremely metal-poor (EMP; [Fe/H]$<-3$) stars with supernova yields of metal-free stars in order to obtain insights into the characteristic masses of the first (Population III or Pop III) stars in the Universe. Supernova yields are prepared with nucleosynthesis calculations of metal-free stars with various initial masses ($M=$13, 15, 25, 40 and 100 $M_{\odot}$) and explosion energies ($E_{51}=E/10^{51}$[erg]$=0.5-60$) to include low-energy, normal-energy, and high-energy explosions. We adopt the mixing-fallback model to take into account possible asymmetry in the supernova explosions and the yields that best-fit the observed abundance patterns of the EMP stars are searched by varying the model parameters. We find that the abundance patterns of the EMP stars are predominantly best-fitted with the supernova yields with initial masses $M<40 M_{\odot}$, and that more than than half of the stars are best fitted with the $M=25 M_\odot$ hypernova ($E_{51}=10$) models. The results also indicate that the majority of the primordial supernovae have ejected $10^{-2}-10^{-1} M_\odot$ of $^{56}$Ni leaving behind a compact remnant, either a neutron star or a black hole, with mass in a range of $\sim 1.5-5 M_{\odot}$. The results suggest that the masses of the first stars responsible for the first metal-enrichment are predominantly $< 40 M_{\odot}$. This implies that the higher mass first stars were either less abundant or directly collapsing into a blackhole without ejecting heavy elements or that a supernova explosion of a higher-mass first star inhibits the formation of the next generation of low-mass stars at [Fe/H]$<-3$.
We report the results of our follow-up campaign of the peculiar supernova ASASSN-15no, based on optical data covering ~300 days of its evolution. Initially the spectra show a pure blackbody continuum. After few days, the HeI 5876 A transition appears with a P-Cygni profile and an expansion velocity of about 8700 km/s. Fifty days after maximum, the spectrum shows signs typically seen in interacting supernovae. A broad (FWHM~8000 km/s) Halpha becomes more prominent with time until ~150 days after maximum and quickly declines later on. At these phases Halpha starts to show an intermediate component, which together with the blue pseudo-continuum are clues that the ejecta begin to interact with the CSM. The spectra at the latest phases look very similar to the nebular spectra of stripped-envelope SNe. The early part (the first 40 days after maximum) of the bolometric curve, which peaks at a luminosity intermediate between normal and superluminous supernovae, is well reproduced by a model in which the energy budget is essentially coming from ejecta recombination and 56Ni decay. From the model we infer a mass of the ejecta Mej = 2.6 Msun; an initial radius of the photosphere R0 = 2.1 x 10^14 cm; and an explosion energy Eexpl = 0.8 x 10^51 erg. A possible scenario involves a massive and extended H-poor shell lost by the progenitor star a few years before explosion. The shell is hit, heated and accelerated by the supernova ejecta. The accelerated shell+ejecta rapidly dilutes, unveiling the unperturbed supernova spectrum below. The outer ejecta start to interact with a H-poor external CSM lost by the progenitor system about 9 -- 90 years before the explosion.
For decades optical time-domain searches have been tuned to find ordinary supernovae, which rise and fall in brightness over a period of weeks. Recently, supernova searches have improved their cadences and a handful of fast-evolving luminous transients (FELTs) have been identified. FELTs have peak luminosities comparable to Type Ia supernovae, but rise to maximum in $<10$ days and fade from view in $<$month. Here we present the most extreme example of this class thus far, KSN2015K, with a rise time of only 2.2 days and a time above half-maximum ($t_{1/2}$) of only 6.8 days. Here we show that, unlike Type Ia supernovae, the light curve of KSN2015K was not powered by the decay of radioactive elements. We further argue that it is unlikely that it was powered by continuing energy deposition from a central remnant (a magnetar or black hole). Using numerical radiation hydrodynamical models, we show that the light curve of KSN2015K is well fit by a model where the supernova runs into external material presumably expelled in a pre-supernova mass loss episode. The rapid rise of KSN2015K therefore probes the venting of photons when a hypersonic shock wave breaks out of a dense extended medium.
Type Ia supernovae originate from the explosion of carbon-oxygen white dwarfs in binary systems, but the exact nature of their progenitors remains elusive. The bulk properties of Type Ia supernova remnants, such as the radius and the centroid energy of the Fe K$\alpha$ blend in the X-ray spectrum, are determined by the properties of the supernova ejecta and the ambient medium. We model the interaction between Chandrasekhar and sub-Chandrasekhar models for Type Ia supernova ejecta and a range of uniform ambient medium densities in one dimension up to an age of 5000 years. We generate synthetic X-ray spectra from these supernova remnant models and compare their bulk properties at different expansion ages with X-ray observations from \textit{Chandra} and \textit{Suzaku}. We find that our models can successfully reproduce the bulk properties of most observed remnants, suggesting that Type Ia SN progenitors do not modify their surroundings significantly on scales of a few pc. Ambient medium density and expansion age are the main contributors to the diversity of the bulk properties in our models. Chandrasekhar and sub-Chandrasekhar progenitors make similar predictions for the bulk remnant properties, but detailed fits to X-ray spectra have the power to discriminate explosion energetics and progenitor scenarios.
Luminous and ultra-luminous infrared galaxies ((U)LIRGs) are rare today but are increasingly abundant at high redshifts. They are believed to be dusty starbursts, and hence should have high rates of supernovae (multiple events per year). Due to their extremely dusty environment, however, such supernovae could only be detected in restframe infrared and longer wavelengths, where our current facilities lack the capability of finding them individually beyond the local universe. We propose a new technique for higher redshifts, which is to search for the presence of supernovae through the variability of the integrated rest-frame infrared light of the entire hosts. We present a pilot study to assess the feasibility of this technique. We exploit a unique region, the "IRAC Dark Field" (IDF), that the Spitzer Space Telescope has observed for more than 14 years in 3--5 micron. The IDF also has deep far-infrared data (200--550 micron) from the Herschel Space Observatory that allow us to select high-redshift (U)LIRGs. We obtain a sample of (U)LIRGs that have secure optical counterparts, and examine their light curves in 3--5 micron. While the variabilities could also be caused by AGNs, we show that such contaminations can be identified. We present two cases where the distinct features in their light curves are consistent with multiple supernovae overlapping in time. Searching for supernovae this way will be relevant to the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) to probe high-redshift (U)LIRGs into their nuclear regions where JWST will be limited by its resolution.
Supernovae that are strongly gravitationally lensed (gLSNe) by galaxies are powerful probes of astrophysics and cosmology that will be discovered systematically by next-generation wide-field, high-cadence imaging surveys such as the Zwicky Transient Facility (ZTF) and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST). Here we use pixel-level simulations that include dust, observing strategy, and multiple supernova subtypes to forecast the rates and properties of gLSNe that ZTF and LSST will find. Applying the resolution-insensitive discovery strategy of Goldstein et al. (2018), we forecast that ZTF (LSST) can discover 0.02 (0.79) 91bg-like, 0.17 (5.92) 91T-like, 1.22 (47.84) Type Ia, 2.76 (88.51) Type IIP, 0.31 (12.78) Type IIL, and 0.36 (15.43) Type Ib/c gLSNe per year. We also forecast that the surveys can discover at least 3.75 (209.32) Type IIn gLSNe per year, for a total of at least 8.60 (380.60) gLSNe per year under fiducial observing strategies. ZTF gLSNe have a median $z_s=0.9$, $z_l=0.35$, $\mu_\mathrm{tot}=30$, $\Delta t_\mathrm{max}= 10$ days, $\min(\theta)= 0.25^{\prime\prime}$, and $N_\mathrm{img} = 4$. LSST gLSNe are less compact and less magnified, with a median $z_s=1.0$, $z_l=0.4$, $\mu_\mathrm{tot}\approx6$, $\Delta t_\mathrm{max} = 25$ days, $\min(\theta)=0.6^{\prime\prime}$, and $N_\mathrm{img} = 2$. As the properties of lensed host galaxy arcs provide critical information for lens mass modeling, we develop a model of the supernova--host galaxy connection and use it to simulate realistic images of the supernova--host--lens systems. We find that the vast majority of gLSN host galaxies will be multiply imaged, enabling detailed constraints on lens models with sufficiently deep high-resolution imaging taken after the supernova has faded. We release the results of our simulations to the public as catalogs at this URL: http://portal.nersc.gov/project/astro250/glsne/.
The Carnegie Supernova Project-II (CSP-II) was an NSF-funded, four-year program to obtain optical and near-infrared observations of a "Cosmology" sample of $\sim100$ Type Ia supernovae located in the smooth Hubble flow ($0.03 \lesssim z \lesssim 0.10$). Light curves were also obtained of a "Physics" sample composed of 90 nearby Type Ia supernovae at $z \leq 0.04$ selected for near-infrared spectroscopic time-series observations. The primary emphasis of the CSP-II is to use the combination of optical and near-infrared photometry to achieve a distance precision of better than 5%. In this paper, details of the supernova sample, the observational strategy, and the characteristics of the photometric data are provided. In a companion paper, the near-infrared spectroscopy component of the project is presented.
We present bolometric light curves constructed from multi-wavelength photometry of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) from the Carnegie Supernova Project and the CfA Supernova Group, using near-infrared observations to provide robust constraints on host galaxy dust extinction. This set of light curves form a well-measured reference set for comparison with theoretical models. Ejected mass and synthesized $^{56}$Ni mass are inferred for each SN Ia from its bolometric light curve using a semi-analytic Bayesian light curve model, and fitting formulae provided in terms of light curve width parameters from the SALT2 and SNooPy light curve fitters. A weak bolometric width-luminosity relation is confirmed, along with a correlation between ejected mass and the bolometric light curve width. SNe Ia likely to have sub-Chandrasekhar ejected masses belong preferentially to the broad-line and cool-photosphere spectroscopic subtypes, and have higher photospheric velocities and populate older, higher-mass host galaxies than SNe Ia consistent with Chandrasekhar-mass explosions. Two peculiar events, SN 2006bt and SN 2006ot, have normal peak luminosities but appear to have super-Chandrasekhar ejected masses.
We present optical photometry and spectroscopy of the Type II supernova ASASSN-14jb, together with VLT MUSE IFU observations of its host galaxy and a nebular-phase spectrum. This SN, in the nearby galaxy ESO 467-G051 ($z=0.006$), was discovered and followed-up by the All Sky Automated Survey for SuperNovae (ASAS-SN). We present LCOGTN $BVgri$ and $Swift$ $w2m1w1ubv$ optical and near-UV/optical light curves and several optical spectra in the early photospheric phase. ASASSN-14jb exploded $\sim 2$ kpc above the star-forming disk of ESO 467-G051, an edge-on disk galaxy. The large projected distance from the disk and non-detection of any H II region in a 1.4 kpc radius in projection are in conflict with the standard environment of core-collapse supernova progenitors and suggests the possible scenario that the progenitor received a kick in a binary interaction. Our analysis yields $D=25\pm 1$ Mpc, $M(^{56}Ni) = 0.0210 \pm 0.0025$ M$_\odot$, $E_{exp}\approx 0.25 \times 10^{51}$ ergs, $M_{ej}\approx 6$ M$_\odot$, and progenitor $R_* = 580 \pm 28$ R$_\odot$, which seems to be consistent with the sub-Solar metallicity of $0.3 \pm 0.1$ Z$_\odot$ derived from the SN spectrum. The nebular spectrum constrains $M_{prog} \simeq 10-12 $ M$_{\odot}$. We discuss the low oxygen abundance of the host galaxy derived from the MUSE data, $12+\log{(O/H)} = 8.27^{+0.16}_{-0.20}$ (O3N2 strong line method), and compare it with the supernova spectra, which is also consistent with a sub-Solar metallicity progenitor. We finally discuss the possible scenarios for the unusual environment for ASASSN-14jb and conclude that either the in-situ star formation or a runaway would imply a low mass progenitor, agreeing with our estimate from the supernova nebular spectrum. We show that the detailed study of the environment can agree with the stronger constrains of the transient observations. (abridged)
Recent studies have argued that the progenitor system of type Iax supernovae must consist of a carbon-oxygen white dwarf accreting from a helium star companion. Based on existing explosion models invoking the pure deflagration of carbon-oxygen white dwarfs, we investigate the likelihood of producing spectral features due to helium in type Iax supernovae. From this scenario, we select those explosion models producing ejecta and $^{56}$Ni masses that are broadly consistent with those estimated for type Iax supernovae (0.014 - 0.478~$M_{\odot}$ and $\sim0.003$ - 0.183~$M_{\odot}$, respectively). To this end, we present a series of models of varying luminosities ($-18.4 \lesssim M_{\rm{V}} \lesssim -14.5$~mag) with helium abundances accounting for up to $\sim$36\% of the ejecta mass, and covering a range of epochs beginning a few days before B$-$band maximum to approximately two weeks after maximum. We find that the best opportunity for detecting \ion{He}{i} features is at near-infrared wavelengths, and in the post-maximum spectra of the fainter members of this class. We show that the optical spectrum of SN~2007J is potentially consistent with a large helium content (a few 10$^{-2}~M_{\odot}$), but argue that current models of accretion and material stripping from a companion struggle to produce compatible scenarios. We also investigate the presence of helium in all objects with near-infrared spectra. We show that SNe~2005hk, 2012Z, and 2015H contain either no helium or their helium abundances are constrained to much lower values ($\lesssim$10$^{-3}~M_{\odot}$). Our results demonstrate the differences in helium content among type Iax supernovae, perhaps pointing to different progenitor channels. Either SN~2007J is an outlier in terms of its progenitor system, or it is not a true member of the type Iax supernova class.
The reliability of Type Ia supernovae (SNIa) may be limited by the imprint of their galactic origins. To investigate the connection between supernovae and their host characteristics, we developed an improved method to estimate the stellar population age of the host as well as the local environment around the site of the supernova. We use a Bayesian method to estimate the star formation history and mass weighted age of a supernova's environment by matching observed spectral energy distributions to a synthesized stellar population. Applying this age estimator to both the photometrically and spectroscopically classified Sloan Digital Sky Survey II supernovae (N=103) we find a $0.114 \pm 0.039~{\rm mag}$ `step' in the average Hubble residual at a stellar age of $\sim 8~\text{Gyr}$; it is nearly twice the size of the currently popular mass step. We then apply a principal component analysis on the SALT2 parameters, host stellar mass, and local environment age. We find that a new parameter, PC$_1$, consisting of a linear combination of stretch, host stellar mass, and local age, shows a very significant ($4.7\sigma$) correlation with Hubble residuals. There is a much broader range of PC$_1$ values found in the Hubble flow sample when compared with the Cepheid calibration galaxies. These samples have mildly statistically different average PC$_1$ values, at $\sim 2.5\sigma$, resulting in at most a 1.3% reduction in the evaluation of H$_0$. Despite accounting for the highly significant trend in SNIa Hubble residuals, there remains a 9% discrepancy between the most recent precision estimates of H$_0$ using SNIa and the CMB.
In the upcoming decade large astronomical surveys will discover millions of transients raising unprecedented data challenges in the process. Only the use of the machine learning algorithms can process such large data volumes. Most of the discovered transients will belong to the known classes of astronomical objects. However, it is expected that some transients will be rare or completely new events of unknown physical nature. The task of finding them can be framed as an anomaly detection problem. In this work, we perform for the first time an automated anomaly detection analysis in the photometric data of the Open Supernova Catalog (OSC), which serves as a proof of concept for the applicability of these methods to future large scale surveys. The analysis consists of the following steps: 1) data selection from the OSC and approximation of the pre-processed data with Gaussian processes, 2) dimensionality reduction, 3) searching for outliers with the use of the isolation forest algorithm, 4) expert analysis of the identified outliers. The pipeline returned 81 candidate anomalies, 27 (33%) of which were confirmed to be from astrophysically peculiar objects. Found anomalies correspond to a selected sample of 1.4% of the initial automatically identified data sample of ~2000 objects. Among the identified outliers we recognised superluminous supernovae, non-classical Type Ia supernovae, unusual Type II supernovae, one active galactic nucleus and one binary microlensing event. We also found that 16 anomalies classified as supernovae in the literature are likely to be quasars or stars. Our proposed pipeline represents an effective strategy to guarantee we shall not overlook exciting new science hidden in the data we fought so hard to acquire. All code and products of this investigation are made publicly available.
If $\nu_\mu$ or $\nu_\tau$ mix with $\nu_e$, neutrino oscillations and collisions in a supernova (SN) core allow these flavors effectively to participate in $\beta$ equilibrium and thus to obtain a large chemical potential. If a sterile species mixes with $\nu_e$, these effects lead to an anomalous loss of energy and lepton number. We study flavor conversion in a SN core on the basis of a new kinetic equation which rigorously includes neutrino interference and degeneneracy effects. Our discussion serves as an example and illustration of the properties of this ``non-abelian Boltzmann equation''.
In a recent paper I concluded that the neutrino background is important for calculating neutrino flavor evolution in supernovae, and including it weakens the connection between r-process nucleosynthesis and cosmologically relevant neutrino masses. Comments on this paper have been posted to this bulletin board; one by J. Cline and the other by Y.Z. Qian and G.M. Fuller. Here I briefly discuss these Comments and demonstrate that they are inaccurate and ill-considered. No corrections to my paper are necessary.
We review the wide range of astrophysical observations of gamma ray emission lines and we discuss their implications. We consider line emission from solar flares, the Orion molecular cloud complex, supernovae 1987A and 1991T, the supernova remnants Cas A and Vela, the interstellar medium, the Galactic center region and several Galactic black hole candidates. The observations have important, and often unique, implications on particle acceleration, star formation, processes of nucleosynthesis, Galactic evolution and compact object physics.
Studies of energetic particle acceleration at collisionless shocks by the diffusive shock acceleration process indicate that completely smooth cosmic ray dominated shock structures are possible. The existence of these is discussed and conditions for their existence derived. It is shown that such solutions cannot dominate the evolution of supernova remnants if the particle diffusion coefficient has the expected strong momentum dependence   To appear in Astronomy and Astrophysics, July 1995, vol 299 pp 222-224
We searched for narrow H$\alpha$ in a high-resolution spectrum of SN 1994D taken 10 days before maximum, and found none. We estimate the limit this places on the progenitor mass loss, and find that it is competitive with recent radio limits, and excludes the highest-mass-loss-rate symbiotic systems as possible progenitors of the normal Type Ia SN 1994D.
Neutrino-nucleus elastic scattering is reduced in dense matter because of correlations between ions. The static structure factor for a plasma of electrons and ions is calculated from Monte Carlo simulations and parameterized with a least squares fit. Our results imply a large increase in the neutrino mean free path. This strongly limits the trapping of neutrinos in a supernova by coherent neutral current interactions.
The plerion inside the composite Supernova Remnant G11.2-0.3 appears to be dominated by the magnetic field to an extent unprecedented among well known cases. We discuss its evolution as determined by a central pulsar and the interaction with the surrounding thermal remnant, which in turn interacts with the ambient medium. We find that a plausible scenario exists, where all the observations can be reproduced with rather typical values for the parameters of the system; we also obtain the most likely period for the still undetected pulsar.
A light pseudoscalar coupled to two photons would be copiously emitted by the core of a supernova. Part of this flux would be converted to $\gamma-$rays by the galactic magnetic field. Measurements on the SN1987A $\gamma-$ray flux by the Gamma-Ray Spectrometer on the Solar Maximum Mission satellite already imply a bound on the coupling $g < 3 \times 10^{-12}$ GeV$^{-1}$. The improved generation of satellite-borne detectors, like EGRET or the project GLAST, could be able to detect a pseudoscalar-to-photon signal from a nearby supernova, for allowed values of $g$.
BVRI light curves are presented for 27 Type Ia supernovae discovered during the course of the Calan/Tololo Survey and for two other SNe Ia observed during the same period. Estimates of the maximum light magnitudes in the B, V, and I bands and the initial decline rate parameter m15(B) are also given.
Assuming the observed pulsar velocities to originate during asymmetric collapse of stellar cores, we compute the amplitude of gravitational waves emitted during type II and Ib supernova explosions and their detection rate from within a distance of 30 Mpc. At the rms-level of advanced laser interferometers h ~ 1.0e-22 at frequencies 300-1000 Hz the expected rate is about 1 per year.
Supernovae provide a unique opportunity for large scale parity violation because they are dominated by neutrinos. We calculate the parity violating asymmetry A of neutrino emission in a strong magnetic field. We assume the neutrinos elastically scatter many times from slightly polarized neutrons. Because of multple interactions, A grows with the optical thickness of the proto-neutron star and may be much larger than previous estimates. As a result, the neutron star could recoil at a significant velocity.
Spectrum and chemical composition of cosmic rays accelerated in supernova remnants are studied on a basis of kinetic approach. The cosmic ray transport equation with the Bohm diffusion coefficient has been numerically solved self-consistently with gas dynamic equations for the underlying flow. Comparison with observational results gives some indications that galactic cosmic rays are produced by supernovae shocks which expanded in the relatively low temperature partially ionized interstellar medium.
The absence or presence of extremely wide binaries with a radio pulsar and an optical counterpart imposes a strong constraint on the existence and magnitude of kicks in supernova explosions. We search for such systems by comparing the positions of radio pulsars which are not known to be in binaries with the positions of visible stars, and find that the number of associations is negligible. According to the performed population synthesis, this implies that kicks must occur, with a lower limit of at least 10 to 20 km/s.
Supernovae are bright luminous stellar objects observable up to redshifts close to z~1. They are used to probe the geometry of the Universe and its expansion rate by applying different methods. In this article, I review various approaches used to measure the present expansion rate of the Universe, $H_{0}$, and the paths to determine its matter density $\Omega_{M}$ and the possible contribution of a non-zero cosmological constant $\Lambda$. An account is given of the numerical estimates of those cosmological parameters according to the present status of the research.
Using the BeppoSAX satellite we have obtained the first secure X-ray detection of the supernova remnant G0.9+0.1. The 1-10 keV spectrum can be described with an absorbed power law with photon index 3 and N_H = 3 times 10^{23} cm^2. The high column density supports a distance similar to that of the Galactic Center. The X-ray emission, with a luminosity L_x = 10^{35} d_{10kpc}^{2} erg/s, coincides with the central radio core, confirming the composite nature of this remnant. Though a search for periodic pulsations gave a negative result, the observed X-rays are probably related to the presence of a young radio pulsar at the center of G0.9+0.1.
We review some of the possible observable effects (reionization, feedback on galaxy formation, supernovae and metal enrichment) of the first collapsed, luminous (Pop III) objects in the universe. We show that supernovae in these objects should be considerably magnified by the intervening cosmological matter distribution; the implications of this process are briefly discussed, anticipating some of the results of Marri & Ferrara (1998).
I present several simple figures to illustrate cosmology and structure formation in a nutshell. Then I discuss the following argument: if we assume that Omega_{Lambda} = 0 then the CMB results favor high Omega_{m} while the supernova results favor low Omega_{m}. This large inconsistency is strong evidence for the incorrectness of the Omega_{Lambda} = 0 assumption. Finally I discuss recent CMB results on the slope and normalization of the primordial power spectrum.
We investigate observational constraints from lensing statistics and high-z type Ia supernovae on flat cosmological models with nonrelativistic matter and an exotic fluid with equation of state, $p_x=(m/3 -1)\rho_x$. We show that agreement with both tests at the 68% confidence level is possible if the parameter $m$ is low ($m \lesssim 0.85$) and $0.24 \lesssim \Omega_{m0} \lesssim 0.38$ with lower values of $\Omega_{m0}$ corresponding to higher $m$. We find that a conventional cosmological constant model with $\Omega_{m0}\simeq 0.33$ is the best fit model of the combined likelihood.
We have obtained high resolution Ca II and Na I absorption line spectra toward 68 OB stars in the direction of the Vela Supernova Remnant. The stars lie at distances of 190 -- 2800 pc as determined by Hipparcos and spectroscopic parallax estimations. The presence of high velocity absorption attributable to the remnant along some of the sight lines constrains the remnant distance to 250+/-30 pc. This distance is consistent with several recent investigations that suggest that the canonical remnant distance of 500 pc is too large.
We calculate neutrino and antineutrino scattering off electrons and nucleons in supernovae using a detailed Monte Carlo transport code incorporating realistic equations of state. The goal is to determine whether particles in a neutron star core, partially spin-aligned by the local magnetic field, can give rise to asymmetric neutrino emission via the standard parity breaking weak force. We conclude that electron scattering in a very high magnetic field does indeed give a net asymmetry, but that nucleon scattering, if present, removes the asymmetry.
We report the discovery of a variable object in the Hubble Deep Field North (HDF-N) which has brightened, during the 8.5 days sampled by the data, by more than 0.9 mag in I and about 0.7 mag in V, remaining stable in B. Subsequent observations of the HDF-N show that two years later this object has dimmed back to about its original brightness in I. The colors of this object, its brightness, its time behavior in the various filters and the evolution of its morphology are consistent with being a Type Ib supernova in a faint galaxy at z~0.95.
Observations have been made with the University of Durham Mark 6 telescope of a number of supernova remnants and young pulsars (Vela pulsar, PSR B1055-52, PSR J1105-6107, PSR J0537-6910 and PSR B0540-69). No VHE gamma ray emission, either steady or pulsed, has been detected from these objects.
The origin and evolution of Lithium-Beryllium-Boron is a crossing point between different astrophysical fields : optical and gamma spectroscopy, non thermal nucleosynthesis, Big Bang and stellar nucleosynthesis and finally galactic evolution. We describe the production and the evolution of Lithium-Beryllium-Boron from Big Bang up to now through the interaction of the Standard Galactic Cosmic Rays with the interstellar medium, supernova neutrino spallation and a low energy component related to supernova explosions in galactic superbubbles.
A light sterile neutrino species has been introduced to explain simultaneously the solar and atmospheric neutrino puzzles and the results of the LSND experiment, while providing for a hot component of dark matter. Employing this scheme of neutrino masses and mixings, we show how matter-enhanced active-sterile neutrino transformation followed by active-active neutrino transformation can solve robustly the neutron deficit problem encountered by models of r-process nucleosynthesis associated with neutrino-heated supernova ejecta.
The C(12)+C(12) => Ne(20)+He(4) fusion reaction rate is shown to be extremely sensitive to variations in the strong coupling constant. Connection with the strong coupling constant is established by using the one boson exchange potential for the nuclear forces and then relating the meson masses and coupling constants of this model to QCD. The implications of a cosmological evolution of these constants on carbon burning in Type 1a Supernovae are discussed.
I consider the state of play regarding associations of supernova remnants (SNRs) with anomalous X-ray pulsars (AXPs) and soft gamma-ray repeaters (SGRs). The three AXP/SNR associations are convincing, and are consistent with AXPs being young, low-velocity neutron stars. The three SGR/SNR associations are far more likely to be chance superpositions, and rely on SGRs being high velocity (>1000 km/s) objects. These results imply either that AXPs evolve into SGRs, or that SGRs and AXPs represent different populations of object.
We better determine the spectral flux distribution of the supernova candidate associated with GRB 970228 by modeling the spectral flux distribution of the host galaxy of this burst, fitting this model to measurements of the host galaxy, and using the fitted model to better subtract out the contribution of the host galaxy to measurements of the afterglow of this burst.
I discuss the nature of the compact X-ray source in the center of the supernova remnant RCW 103. Several models, based on the accretion onto a compact object are analyzed. I show that it is more likely that the central X-ray source is an accreting neutron star than an accreting black hole. I also argue that models of a disrupted binary system consisting of an old accreting neutron star and a new one observed as a 69-ms pulsar are most favored.
We summarise the proceedings of the SRCfTA workshop on ``Supernova Remnants, Pulsars and the Interstellar Medium'' that was held at the University of Sydney on Mar 18 and 19, 1999.
Cosmic explosions are observed in many astrophysical environments. They range in scale from hydromagnetic instabilities in the terrestrial magnetotail and solar ``nanoflares'' to cosmological gamma ray bursts, supernovae and the protracted intervals of nuclear activity that produce the giant quasars and radio galaxies. There are many parallels in the analyses of the explosion sites that are highlighted at this workshop, specifically stellar coronae, accretion disks, supernovae and compact objects. In this introductory talk, some general issues are discussed and some more specific questions relating to the individual sites are raised.
I show that recent observations of r-process abundances in metal-poor stars are difficult to explain if neutron star mergers (NSMs) are the major r-process sources. In contrast, such observations and meteoritic data on Hf182 and I129 in the early solar system support a self-consistent picture of r-process enrichment by supernovae (SNe). While further theoretical studies of r-process production and enrichment are needed for both SNe and NSMs, I emphasize two possible direct observational tests of the SN r-process model: gamma rays from decay of r-process nuclei in SN remnants and surface contamination of the companion by SN r-process ejecta in binaries.
The unexpected faintness of high-redshift Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia), as measured by two teams, has been interpreted as evidence that the expansion of the Universe is accelerating. We review the current challenges to this interpretation and seek to answer whether the cosmological implications are compelling. We discuss future observations of SNe Ia which could offer extraordinary evidence to test acceleration.
We present a new way of modeling turbulent thermonuclear deflagration fronts in Chandrasekhar-mass white dwarfs, consisting of carbon and oxygen, undergoing a type Ia supernova explosion. Our approach is a front capturing/tracking hybrid scheme, based on a level set method, which treats the front as a mathematical discontinuity and allows for full coupling between the front geometry and the flow field. First results of the method applied to the problem of type Ia supernovae are discussed. It will be shown that even in 2-D and even with a physically motivated sub-grid model numerically ``converged'' results are difficult to obtain.
It is shown that if the shell of the Vela supernova remnant is responsible for nearly all the scattering of the Vela pulsar, then the scintillation and proper motion velocities of the pulsar can only be reconciled with each other in the case of nonzero transverse velocity of the scattering material. A possible origin of large-scale transverse motions in the shell of the Vela supernova remnant is discussed.
Analysed in the framework of homogeneous FLRW models, the magnitude-redshift data from high redshift supernovae yield, as a primary result, a strictly positive cosmological constant. Another reading of the currently published measurements does not exclude a possible ruling out of the Cosmological Principle and, thus, also, of the cosmological constant hypothesis. It is shown how shortly coming data can be used to settle this fondamental issue, pertaining to both cosmology and particle physics.
Neutrino interactions with lead produce neutrons in numbers that depend on neutrino energy and type. A detector based on lead perchlorate, for example, would be able to measure the energy deposited by electrons and gammas in coincidence with the number of neutrons produced. Sorting the electron energy spectra by the number of coincident neutrons permits the identification of the neutrino type that induced the reaction. This separation allows an analysis which can determine the temperatures of electron neutrinos and electron anti-neutrinos from a supernova in one experiment. The neutrino reaction signatures of lead perchlorate and the fundamentals of using this material as a neutrino detector are described.
Recent experimental results find strong indications that the universe is flat, while other experimental results from supernovae Ia observations have been interpreted to show that, not only that there is an accelerating expansion of the universe, but also that the universe is strongly curved. By means of a recently proposed metric, I am able to show that the experimental results which had previously been analyzed to give a strong curvature are quite consistent with a flat universe, thus resolving the apparent mismatch. The conclusion of these latter authors which indicated an accelerating expansion of the universe remains unchanged.
We present observations of the peculiar supernova SN 1998bw, which was probably associated with GRB 980425. The photometric and spectroscopic evolution is monitored up to 500 days past explosion. We also present modeling based on spherically symmetric, massive progenitor models and very energetic explosions. The models allow line identification and clearly show the importance of mixing. From the late light curves we estimate that about 0.3-0.9 solar masses of ejected Nickel-56 is required to power the supernova.
An energetic argument implies that a galaxy like the Milky Way is blowing a powerful wind that carries away most of the heavy elements currently synthesized and has impacted the IGM out to at least 180 kpc. Rich clusters of galaxies appear to be closed systems in which most heavy elements are ejected from galaxies. More supernovae are required than the yield of core-collapse SNe from a Salpeter IMF. X-ray observations imply that the IGM in groups and clusters as been strongly preheated. SNe probably cannot supply the required energy, which must come from AGN.
The development of new supernova neutrino detectors relies on the expected hard energy spectrum of the nu_mu and nu_tau emitted in the supernova. We show that SN1987A was sensitive to the large mixing angle (LMA) and "just so" solution to the solar neutrino problem. We review the previous analysis of the SN1987A data and propose a new analysis. The results of this analysis strongly disfavor the LMA solution, provided the nu_mu and nu_tau are hard as predicted
These lecture notes intend to form a short pedagogical introduction to the use of typical type Ia-Supernovae (hereafter SNIa) as standard candles to determine the energy density of the universe. Problems of principle for taking SNIa as cosmological probes are pointed out, and new attempts at solving them are indicated including the empirical width-luminosity relation and its possible explanations. Finally, the observations of SNIa at high redshift carried out by two major teams are briefly reviewed and their interpretation as evidence for an accelerating universe is also rapidly discussed.
On the basis of the current observational evidence, we put forward the case that the merger of two CO white dwarfs produces both a Type Ia supernova explosion and a stellar remnant, the latter in the form of a magnetar. The estimated occurrence rates raise the possibility that many, if not most, SNe Ia might result from white dwarf mergers.
We report the discovery of the shocked molecular gas in the supernova remnant HB 21. We derive the physical parameters of the shocked gas from CO J=1-0 and J=2-1 line observations. We discuss the correlation of the shocked molecular gas with the previously detected, shocked atomic gas and the associated infrared emission.
The numerical value of the cosmological constant is calculated using a recently suggested cosmological model and found to be 2.036 x 10^(-35) s^(-2). This value of the cosmological constant is in excellent agreement with the measurements recently obtained by the High-Z Supernova Team and the Supernova Cosmology Project.
We present the preliminary results of a 40.8 ks Chandra ACIS observation of the young supernova remnant (SNR) N103B located in the Large Magellanic Cloud. The image reveals structure at the sub-arcsecond level, including several bright knots and filamentary structures. The remnant has the characteristic spectrum of a Type Ia SNR, containing strong lines of Fe, He-and H-like Si and S, Ar, and Ca. Narrow band images reveal non-uniformities in the remnant.
Unique data on $BVRI$ brightness curves of the OT of GRB 970508 obtained with the 6-m telescope have been interpreted in the framework of the GRB-SN (supernovae) connection. The effect must be maximal in the I_c band as OT GRB 970228. The peak absolute (M_B) magnitude of the suggested SN must be around -19.5 for the OT of GRB 970508. If all or the main part of long GRBs are associated with SNe, the GRB host galaxies (for ground-based observations, at least) must be dimmer than the peak magnitude of the SN.
We briefly review the fundamentals of nuclear gamma-ray line astronomy (radioactive astronomy), focusing on its role to decipher the intimate physics of supernovae, either immediatly (via $^{56}Co)$ or after a time delay (via $^{44}Ti$). All kinds of supernovae can be in principle tested through their radioactivities and their associated gamma-ray lines.   Dedicated to the spectroscopy and imaging of celestial sources in the 15 keV to 10 MeV band, the ESA scientific observatory INTEGRAL will open a golden age of nuclear astrophysics in Europe
Evolution of adiabatic remnants of an aspherical supernova explosion in uniform medium are considered. Thermal X-ray emission of such remnants are investigated. It is shown that integral thermal X-ray characteristics (X-ray luminosity and spectrum) of the objects do not allow us to reveal the assymetry in the explosion because these characteristics are close to their Sedov counterparts. Surface distribution of X-ray emission is sensitive to anisotropy of the explosion and nonuniformity of the interstellar medium.
We employ hydrodynamic simulations to study the effects of high shock compression ratios, as expected for fast shocks with efficient particle acceleration, on the convective instability of driven waves in supernova remnants. We find that the instability itself does not depend significantly on the compression ratio, but because the width of the interaction region between the forward and reverse shocks can shrink significantly with increasing shock compression, we find that convective instabilities can reach all the way to the forward shock front if compression ratios are high enough.
The optical light curve of the afterglow following the gamma-ray burst GRB990712 is re-examined. Recently published polarization measurements of that source require a collimated outflow geometry that in turn predicts a break in the light curve. We show that the V-band light curve is consistent with such a break and that the post-break light curve evolution is dominated by a supernova contribution.
We propose an approximation to general relativity that captures the main gravitational effects of dynamical importance in supernovae. The conceptual link between this formalism and the Newtonian limit is such that it could likely be implemented in existing multidimensional Newtonian gravitational hydrodynamics codes employing a Poisson solver. As a test of the formalism's utility, we display results for rapidly rotating (and therefore highly deformed) neutron stars.
Recently we proposed that the acceleration of the Universe could be due to gravity leaking to extra dimensions. This scenario gives an alternative to the cosmological constant or quintessence. In [astro-ph/0106274] the authors claimed that this proposal is strongly disfavored if not ruled out by the existing data on Supernovae, Cosmic Microwave Background and clusters. We show that the work [astro-ph/0106274] contains incorrect statements in the theoretical part, and, moreover, we argue that the main conclusions of the work concerning the comparison with the data are premature.
Nearly 4 years ago, two teams of observational astronomers reported that high-redshift Type Ia supernovae are fainter than expected in a decelerating or freely coasting universe. The radical conclusion that the universe has been accelerating in the past few billion years, possibly because of a nonzero value for Einstein's cosmological constant, has gripped the worlds of astronomy and physics, causing a flurry of new research. Having participated on both teams (but much more closely with one than the other), here I provide a personal, historical account of the story.
Genetic connections between anomalous X-ray pulsars (AXPs) or soft gamma ray repeaters (SGRs)and supernova remnants (SNRs) can hold important clues to the nature of these objects through the properties of the associated SNRs. We examine various criteria jointly to assess the reliability of possible connections. 3 AXPs and 2 SGRs are most probably genetically connected with SNRs. Distances and ages are discussed and their likely ranges are indicated.
We present $\gamma $-ray spectra for a set of Type Ia supernovae models. Our study is based on a detailed Monte Carlo transport scheme for both spherical and full 3-D geometries. Classical and new challenges of the $\gamma $ ray astronomy are addressed. We find that $\gamma $-rays are very suitable to reveal the structure of the envelope and, thus, they allow to probe properties of the nuclear burning front and the progenitor, namely its central density and global asphericities. The potential problems are discussed for the quantitative comparison between theoretical and observed line fluxes during the first few months after the explosion.
We present a BIMA image of the supernova remnant G21.5-0.9 at 94 GHz with angular resolution 8.6" x 4.5". On scales larger than our synthesized beam, our results do not indicate any radial or local variations in the acceleration or synchrotron loss processes for the relativistic particles emitting at radio wavelengths. However, the FWHM size of the radio remnant is significantly greater than that of the X-ray remnant. Either any low-frequency spectral break is distributed across the remnant, or more probably the break frequency is in fact higher than ~100 GHz.
The observed mass distribution for the compact remnants of massive stars (neutron stars and black holes) and its relationship to possible mechanisms for the ejection of the envelopes of type II and Ib/c supernovae is analyzed. The conclusion is drawn that this distribution can be obtained only by a magneto-rotational mechanism for the supernovae with sufficiently long time of the field amplification, and a soft equation of state for neutron stars with limiting masses \sim1.5-1.6M_\odot. Some consequences of this hypothesis are discussed.
Modified versions of two "standard" pulsar search techniques are presented that allow large-scale searches for pulsations in long duration high-energy data sets using relatively modest amounts of computer time. For small numbers of photons (N_phot <~ 10^4), optimized brute-force epoch folding searches are preferred. For larger numbers of photons, advanced Fourier domain acceleration searches are used. Using these techniques, my collaborators and I have searched Chandra observations of the CasA supernova remnant (SNR) point source and the isolated neutron star RX J1856.5-3754 for pulsations, and confirmed the 65.6 ms pulsar in the 3C 58 SNR during a blind search of archival RXTE data.
We present optical observations of the fields of two X-ray sources located near the center of the shell-like supernova remnant G266.1-1.2. No objects brighter than R~22.5 and B~23 are present within the small Chandra error region of AX J0851.9-4617.4, besides a R~17 star that has already been excluded as a possible counterpart. A bright diffuse H_alpha nebula is present close to the position of the candidate neutron star.
We investigate the effect of gravitational lensing on the farthest known supernova, SN1997ff. The SN was found at z~1.7 in the Hubble Deep Field North and is most likely of Type Ia. Due to our poor knowledge of the properties of the lensing foreground galaxies, we conclude that large magnification effects are possible for reasonable lens parameter values implying that this single SN does not put any strong constraints on the cosmological parameters, grey dust obscuration or luminosity evolution of SNIa until we can model the lensing with high accuracy.
I summarize recent work comparing relative distances measured to individual galaxies with independent methods. The comparisons include: ground-based surface brightness fluctuation (SBF) and fundamental plane distances to 170 galaxies, distances predicted from galaxy velocities and the inferred gravity field, HST SBF measurements to seven early-type hosts of Type Ia supernovae, and ties of the Cepheid distance scale to early-type galaxies. Independent calibrations for some methods provide interesting constraints on the Cepheid zero point.
We discuss observational constraints coming from CMB and type Ia supernovae, for the model of accelerated universe produced by gravitational leakage into extra dimensions. Our fits indicate that the model is currently in agreement with the data. We also give the equations governing the evolution of cosmological perturbations. Future observations will be able to severely constrain the model.
We are currently carrying out a K_s band survey for core-collapse supernovae in the nuclear (central kpc) regions of nearby starburst galaxies with the INGRID near-IR camera at the WHT. In this article we concentrate in describing mainly the observations and the real time processing of the SN search data, which makes use of the ING's integrated data flow system.
The Relative Space-Time Transformation (RSTT) Paradigm and the Interpretation of the Burst Structure (IBS) Paradigm are applied to the analysis of the structure of the burst and afterglow of Gamma-Ray Bursts within the theory based on the vacuum polarization process occurring in an Electro-Magnetic Black Hole, the EMBH theory. This framework is applied to the study of the GRB991216 which is used as a prototype. The GRB-Supernova Time Sequence (GSTS) Paradigm, which introduces the concept of induced gravitational collapse in the Supernovae-GRB association, is announced and will be applied, within the EMBH theory, to GRB980425 as a prototype in a forthcoming paper.
We use the very simple and successful Cannonball Model (CB) of gamma ray bursts (GRBs) and their afterglows (AGs) to analyze the observations of the strongly extinct optical AG of GRB 010921 with ground-based telescopes at early times, and with the HST at later time. We show that GRB 010921 was indeed associated with a 1998bw-like supernova at the GRB's redshift.
We present a numerical model to study the behavior of thermonuclear flames in the discontinuity approximation. This model is applied to investigate the Landau-Darrieus instability under conditions found in Type Ia supernova explosions of Chandrasekhar mass white dwarfs. This is a first step to explore the flame microstructure in these events. The model reproduces Landau's linearized stability analysis in early stages of the flame evolution and the stabilization in a cellular flame structure in the nonlinear stage.
Gravitational lensing will cause a dispersion in the Hubble diagram for high redshift sources. This effect will introduce a bias in the cosmological parameter determination using the distance-redshift relation for Type Ia supernovae. In this note we show how one can diagnose and correct for this bias when doing precision cosmology with supernovae.
We calculate evolution and nucleosynthesis in massive Pop III stars with M = 13 ~ 270Msun, and compare the results with abundances of very metal-poor halo stars. The observed abundances can be explained by the energetic core-collapse supernovae with M < ~ 130Msun (``hypernovae'') but not by pair-instability supernovae (PISNe) with M ~ 140-270 Msun. This result constrain the IMF for the Pop III and very metal-poor Pop II stars.
We present the first complete 3-dimensional simulations of the core-collapse of a massive star from the onset of collapse to the resultant supernova explosion. We compare the structure of the convective instabilities that occur in 3-dimensional models with those of past 2-dimensional simulations. Although the convective instabilities are clearly 3-dimensional in nature, we find that both the size-scale of the flows and the net enhancement to neutrino heating does not differ greatly between 2- and 3-dimensional models. The explosion energy, explosion timescale, and remnant mass does not differ by more than 10% between 2- and 3-dimensional simulations.
We have made the first direct interferometric proper motion measurements of the radio pulsar B1757-24, which sits at the tip of the "beak" of the putative "Duck" supernova remnant. The peculiar morphology of this radio complex has been used to argue alternately that the pulsar's space motion was either surprisingly high or surprisingly low. In fact, we show that the pulsar's motion is so small that it and its associated nonthermal nebula G5.27-0.9 (the "head") are almost certainly unrelated to the much larger G5.4-1.2 (the "wings").
We present the results of three-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations of the subsonic thermonuclear burning phase in type Ia supernovae. The burning front model contains no adjustable parameters so that variations of the explosion outcome can be linked directly to changes in the initial conditions. In particular, we investigate the influence of the initial flame geometry on the explosion energy and find that it appears to be weaker than in 2D. Most importantly, our models predict global properties such as the produced nickel masses and ejecta velocities within their observed ranges without any fine tuning.
We have undertaken a study of radio and infrared molecular-line emission towards several SNRs in order to investigate molecular signatures of SNR shocks, and to test models for OH maser production in SNRs. Here we present results on G349.7+0.2.
The distribution and kinematics of neutral hydrogen have been studied in a wide area around the supernova remnant W28. A 2.5 x 2.5 arcdeg field centered at l = 6.5 arcdeg, b = 0 arcdeg was surveyed using the Parkes 64-m radio telescope (HPBW 14.7 arcmin at lambda 21 cm). Even though W28 is located in a complex zone of the Galactic plane, we have found different HI features which are evidence of the interaction between W28 and its surrounding gas.
We use the very simple and successful Cannonball (CB) model of gamma ray bursts (GRBs) and their afterglows (AGs) to analyze the observations of the mildly extinct optical AG of the relatively nearby GRB 020405. We show that GRB 020405 was associated with a 1998bw-like supernova (SN) at the GRB's redshift that appeared dimmer and redder than SN1998bw because of extinction in the host and our Galaxy. The case for the SN/GRB association --advocated in the CB model-- is becoming indubitable. We discuss the extent to which the GRB/SN connection is model-dependent.
Recent results for Galactic and Magellanic Cloud Wolf-Rayet stars are summarised based on line blanketed, clumped model atmospheres together with UV, optical and IR spectroscopy. The trend towards earlier WN and WC spectral types with decreasing metallicity is explained via the sensitivity of classification diagnostics to abundance/wind density, such that WR mass-loss rates are metallicity dependent. Pre-supernovae masses for WC stars are determined, in reasonable agreement with CO-cores of recent Type-Ic SN.
We report the discovery of a small Halpha nebula positionally coincident with the candidate neutron star AX J0851.9-4617.4 located at the center of the supernova remnant G 266.1-1.2. The nebula has a roughly circular shape with a diameter of ~6'' and a flux of ~10^-2 photons cm^-2 s^-1 in the Halpha line. Considering the uncertainties in the distance and energy output from the putative neutron star, we find that such a flux can be explained either in a bow-shock model or assuming that the nebular emission is due to photo-ionization and heating of the ambient gas.
We present a brief review of Chandra observations of neutron stars, with a concentration on neutron stars in supernova remnants. The early Chandra results clearly demonstrate how critical the angular resolution has been in order to separate the neutron star emission from the surrounding nebulosity.
We report on a large survey for double degenerate (DD) binaries as potential progenitors of type Ia supernovae with the UVES spectrograph at the ESO VLT (ESO SN Ia Progenitor surveY - SPY).
The distance-redshift relation observed for supernovae has led to the discovery that the expansion of the universe is accelerating. A next generation experiment, the Supernova/Acceleration Probe (SNAP), can investigate the nature of the dark energy responsible, determining its energy density contribution and equation of state. In addition, indications of time variation in the equation of state could provide critical clues to the underlying fundamental physics; we show how SNAP can achieve 3 sigma detection of such time variation in some cases.
A Chandra X-ray observation has detected an unresolved source at the center of the supernova remnant Kes 79. The best single-model fit to the source spectrum is a blackbody with an X-ray luminosity Lx (0.3-8.0 keV) = 7 x 10^{33} ergs s^{-1}. There is no evidence for a surrounding pulsar wind nebula. There are no cataloged counterparts at other wavelengths, but the absorption is high. The source properties are similar to the central source in Cas A even though the Kes 79 remnant is considerably older.
Light echoes are a promising tool to probe the environment where SNe Ia explode and an independent source of information on the progenitor's nature. After giving a brief introduction to the phenomenon we review the two known cases, i.e. SNe 1991T and 1998bu. We then present the results we obtained from the test case of SN1998es in NGC632. This object was classified as a 1991T-like event and was affected by a strong reddening, a fact which made it a good candidate for a light echo detection.
We present several hydrodynamical simulations of thermonuclear supernovae dealing with multiple delayed detonations. The calculations were carried out in three dimensions, making possible to study the influence of geometry of the flame front in two aspects. First, the evolution of its fractal dimension during the deflagration phase has been followed until a critical value is reached such that the deflagration may turn into a detonation. Second, as the resulting detonation could probably be scattered through the flame, the effect of its initial location on the detonation propagation, final energetics and nucleosynthesis has been explored.
In recent years, it has become clear from multidimensional simulations that the outcome of deflagrations depends strongly on the initial configuration of the flame. We have studied under which conditions this configuration could consist of a number of scattered, isolated, hot bubbles. Afterwards, we have calculated the evolution of deflagrations starting from different numbers of bubbles. We have found that starting from 30 bubbles a mild explosion is produced M(Ni56)=0.56 solar masses, while starting from 10 bubbles the star becomes only marginally unbound (K = 0.05 foes).
Interstellar turbulence is expected to dissipate quickly in the absence of continuous energy input. I examine the energy available for driving the turbulence from six likely mechanisms: magnetorotational instability, gravitational instability, protostellar outflows, H II region expansion, stellar winds, and supernovae. I conclude that supernovae contribute far more energy than the other mechanisms, and so form the most likely drving mechanism.
The effect of the shock propagation on neutrino oscillation in supernova is studied paying attention to evolution of average energy of $\nu_{e}$ and $\bar{\nu}_{e}$. We show that the effect appears as a decrease in average $\nu_{e}$ (in case of inverted mass hierarchy, $\bar{\nu}_{e}$) energy at stellar surface as the shock propagates. It is found that the effect is significant 2 seconds after bounce if $3 \times 10^{-5} < \sin^{2}{\theta_{13}} < 10^{-2}$.
Experience with core-collapse supernova simulations shows that accurate accounting of total particle number and 4-momentum can be a challenge for computational radiative transfer. This accurate accounting would be facilitated by the use of particle number and 4-momentum transport equations that allow transparent conversion between volume and surface integrals in both configuration and momentum space. Such conservative formulations of general relativistic kinetic theory in multiple spatial dimensions are presented in this paper, and their relevance to core-collapse supernova simulations is described.
We present observations of the Type Ia supernova SN 2002er during the brightening phase. The observations were performed with the Potsdam Multi Aperture Spectrophotometer (PMAS) integral field instrument. Due to the 8"*8", field of view of the spectrograph an accurate background subtraction was possible. Results from analyses of the evolution of absorption features in comparisons with other SNe show that SN 2002er is a fairly bright Type Ia supernova with a peak brightness of M_B=-19.6+-0.1.
Transporting nu_mu and nu_tau in a supernova (SN) core involves several processes that have been neglected in traditional simulations. Based on a Monte Carlo study we find that the flavor-dependent spectral differences are much smaller than is often stated in the literature. A full-scale SN simulation using a Boltzmann solver and including all relevant neutrino reactions confirms these results. The flavor-dependent flux differences are largest during the initial accretion phase.
This review gives an update of the cosmological use of SNe Ia and the progress made in testing their properties from the local universe to high-z. The cosmological road from high-z supernovae down to Galactic SNe Ia is followed in search of the answer to standing questions on their nature and their validity as cosmological indicators.
The central regions of the remnants of Galactic SNe Ia have been examined for the presence of companion stars of the exploded supernovae. We present the results of this survey for the historical SN 1572 and SN 1006. The spectra of the stars are modeled to obtain Teff, log g and the metallicity. Radial velocities are obtained with an accuracy of 5--10 km s$^{-1}$. Implications for the nature of the companion star in SNeIa follow.
The supernova SN 2002ap was discovered in the outer regions of the nearby spiral M74 on January 29.4 UT. Early photometric and spectroscopic observations indicate the supernova belongs to the class of Ic hypernova. Late time (After JD 2452500) light curve decay slopes are similar to that of the hypernovae SN 1997ef and SN 1998bw. We present here the $BVRI$ photometric light curves and colour evolutions of SN 2002ap to investigate the late time nature of the light curve.
We show that the black hole in the x-ray binary Cygnus X-1 was formed in situ and did not receive an energetic trigger from a nearby supernova. The progenitor of the black hole had an initial mass greater than 40 solar masses and during the collapse to form the ~10 solar mass black hole of Cygnus X-1, the upper limit for the mass that could have been suddenly ejected is ~1 solar mass, much less than the mass ejected in a supernova. The observations suggest that high-mass stellar black holes may form promptly, when massive stars disappear silently.
We perform a detailed comparison of the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) measurements of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) temperature and polarization anisotropy with the predictions of quintessence cosmological models of dark energy. We consider a wide range of quintessence models, including: a constant equation-of-state; a simply-parametrized, time-evolving equation-of-state; a class of models of early quintessence; scalar fields with an inverse-power law potential. We also provide a joint fit to the CBI and ACBAR CMB data, and the type 1a supernovae. Using these select constraints we identify viable, target models for further analysis.
We analyse late-time observations, available photometry and spectra, of a sample of type II plateau supernovae (SNe IIP). The possibility of using H$\alpha$ luminosity at the nebular epoch as a tracer of $^{56}$Ni mass in this class of objects is investigated, yielding a consistency with the photometry-based estimates within 20%. Interesting correlations are found and their impacts on our present understanding of the physics of core collapse SNe are discussed.
It has been suggested that the observed pulsar velocities are caused by an asymmetric neutrino emission from a hot neutron star during the first seconds after the supernova collapse. We calculate the magnitude of gravitational waves produced by the asymmetries in the emission of neutrinos. The resulting periodic gravitational waves may be detectable by LIGO and LISA in the event of a nearby supernova explosion.
There are many interesting topics at the intersection of physics and astrophysics we call Supernova Theory. A small subset of them include the origin of pulsar kicks, gravitational radiation signatures of core bounce, and the possible roles of neutrinos and rotation in the mechanism of explosion. In this brief communication we summarize various recent ideas and calculations that bear on these themes.
A mathematically motivated fitting function for analyzing supernovae distance-redshift data is suggested. It is pointed out that this function can be useful in analyzing SNAP data. To illustrate our method, we analyze current experimental data which includes 78 supernovae and 20 radio galaxies. From these data we obtain vacuum equation of state in a model independent way. We show that the flat Universe model with a cosmological constant is in a good agreement with observations.
The association of PSR B1757-24 and the supernova remnant (SNR) G5.4-1.2 was recently questioned by Thorsett et al. (2002) on the basis of proper motion measurements of the pulsar and the "incorrect" orientation of the vector of pulsar transverse velocity [inferred from the orientation of the cometary-shaped pulsar wind nebula (PWN)]. We showed, however, that the association could be real if both objects are the remnants of an off-centred cavity supernova (SN) explosion.
In this review of X-ray and gamma-ray observations of Cas A, evidence is discussed that Cas A was a Type Ib supernova of a Wolf-Rayet star with a main sequence mass between 22-25 Msun, that exploded after stellar wind loss had reduced its mass to ~6 Msun. The observed kinematics and the high Ti-44 yield indicate that the supernova explosion was probably assymetric, with a kinetic energy of ~2x10^51 erg.
In this paper are summarized the main advances of the last years in the field of SN spectra . The arguments against a monodimensional sequence for SNIa are discussed as well as the efforts to improve the temporal and spectral coverage of this kind of SNe, with the aim to understand the physics of the explosions for their use as cosmological distance indicators. Although variety is the main character of core-collapse SNe, we have been recently surprised by both exceptionally under- and over-energetic explosions. The main properties of these two extreme subclasses are here reviewed.
We present preliminary data and modeling of the late time light curve of the Type Ia supernova SN 2000cx. Optical and near-infrared data obtained with the VLT at 360 to 480 days past maximum light show the increasing importance of the near-infrared regime. Detailed multi-band modeling based on W7 also show this effect. Conclusions on positron escape in this phase may therefore require more detailed observations and modeling than hitherto appreciated.
I present a review of X-ray observations of supernova remnants with an emphasis on shell-type remnants. The topics discussed are the observation of fresh nucleosynthesis products, shock heating and cosmic ray acceleration.
We consider an improved rotational mechanism of the explosion of a collapsing supernova. We show that this mechanism leads to two-stage collapse with a phase difference of \sim 5 h. Based on this model, we attempt a new interpretation of the events in underground neutrino detectors on February 23, 1987, related to the supernova SN 1987A.
A new method to study the effects of neutrino masses on a supernova neutrino signal is proposed. The method relies exclusively on the analysis of the full statistics of neutrino events, it is independent of astrophysical assumptions, and does not require the observation of any additional phenomenon to trace possible delays in the neutrino arrival times. A statistics of several thousands of events as could be collected by SuperKamiokande, would allow to explore a neutrino mass range somewhat below 1eV.
We present the general analytic solution for the evolution of radiative supernova remnants in a uniform interstellar medium, under thin-shell approximation. This approximation is shown to be very accurate approach to this task. For a given set of parameters, our solution closely matches the results of numerical models, showing a transient in which the deceleration parameter reaches a maximum value of 0.33, followed by a slow convergence to the asymptotic value 2/7. Oort (1951) and McKee and Ostriker (1977) analytic solutions are discussed, as special cases of the general solution we have found.
In general-relativistic cosmological models, the expansion history, matter content, and geometry are closely intertwined. In this brief paper, we clarify the distinction between the effects of geometry and expansion history on the luminosity distance. We show that the cubic correction to the Hubble law, measured recently with high-redshift supernovae, is the first cosmological measurement, apart from the cosmic microwave background, that probes directly the effects of spatial curvature. We illustrate the distinction between geometry and expansion with a toy model for which the supernova results already indicate a curvature radius larger than the Hubble distance.
Neutrino-matter cross sections and interaction rates are central to the core-collapse supernova phenomenon and, very likely, to the viability of the explosion mechanism itself. In this paper, we describe the major neutrino scattering, absorption, and production processes that together influence the outcome of core collapse and the cooling of protoneutron stars. One focus is on energy redistribution and many-body physics, but our major goal is to provide a useful resource for those interested in supernova neutrino microphysics.
There are three astroparticle physics puzzles which fire the imagination: the origin of the ``Great Positron Producer'' in the galactic bulge, the nature of the gamma-ray bursts central engine and the mechanism of supernova explosions. We show that the mirror matter model has the potential to solve all three of these puzzles in one beautifully simple strike.
Analysis of the massive star properties during C, Ne, O and Si burning i.e. the neutrino-cooled stage, leads to the simplified neutrino emission model. In the framework of this model we have simulated spectrum of the antineutrinos. Flux normalized according to the massive star model with explicitly given neutrino luminosity allow us to predict signal produced in water Cherenkov detectors. The results are discussed from the point of view of the possibility of the core-collapse supernova event prediction in advance of a few days.
I summarize, in the form of an extended abstract, the ongoing efforts at the University of Arizona (and in collaboration) to understand core-collapse supernovae theoretically. Included are short discussions of 1D (SESAME) and 2D (VULCAN/2D) codes and results, as well as discussions of the possible role of rotation. Highlighted are recent developments in multi-dimensional radiation hydrodynamics and the essential physics of the neutrino-driven mechanism.
The nature of dark energy is of such fundamental importance -- yet such a mystery -- that a dedicated dark energy experiment should be as comprehensive and powerfully incisive as possible. The Supernova/Acceleration Probe robustly controls for a wide variety of systematic uncertainties, employing the Type Ia supernova distance method, with high signal to noise light curves and spectra over the full redshift range from z=0.1-1.7, and the weak gravitational lensing method with an accurate and stable point spread function.
We demonstrate the important role of anisotropic neutrino radiation on the mechanism of core-collapse supernova explosions. Through a new parameter study with a fixed radiation field of neutrinos, we show that prolate explosions caused by globally anisotropic neutrino radiation is the most effective mechanism of increasing the explosion energy when the total neutrino luminosity is given. This is suggestive of the fact that the expanding materials of SN 1987A has a prolate geometry.
Measurements suggest that our universe has a substantial dark energy component. The most recent data on type Ia supernovae give a dark energy density which is in good agreement with other measurements if the dark energy is assumed to be a cosmological constant. Here we examine to what extent that data can put constraints on a more general equation of state for the dark energy.
We present a revised interpretation of recent analysis of supernovae data. We evaluate the effect of the priors on the extraction of the dark energy equation of state. We find that the conclusions depend strongly on the $\Omega_M$ prior value and on its uncertainty, and show that a biased fitting procedure applied on non concordant simulated data can converge to the "concordance model". Relaxing the prior on $\Omega_M$ points to other sets of solutions, which are not excluded by observational data.
We ensure successful explosions (of otherwise non-explosive models) by enhancing the neutrino luminosity via reducing the neutrino scattering cross sections or by increasing the heating efficiency via enhancing the neutrino absorption cross sections in the heating region. Our investigations show that the resulting electron fraction Ye in the innermost ejecta is close to 0.5, in some areas even exceeding 0.5. We present the effects of the resulting values for Ye on the nucleosynthesis yields of the innermost zones of core collapse supernovae.
We present here the combined radio spectrum from the Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope (GMRT) and Very Large Array (VLA) of type-IIb SN 1993J (age 11 years) and a type-Ic SN 2003bg (age 1 year). In SN 1993J, we find a break in the spectrum at 4 GHz and associate it with Synchrotron cooling break. Hence, we determine the magnetic field independent of equipartition assumption between relativistic electrons and magnetic energy. We also see a hint of break in the spectrum of SN 2003bg between 22-40 GHz. The spectrum of SN 2003bg is well described by the synchrotron self absorption model.
The preliminary analysis of the optical data of SN1999cw show that this object has the photometric and spectroscopic behavior of a Type Ia supernova similar to SN1991T, reaching an apparent magnitude at maximum B(max)=14.30 and a Delta m_{15}(B)=0.94.
The Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS; http://cfht.hawaii.edu/SNLS) will discover and obtain g'r'i'z' lightcurves for more than 700 spectroscopically confirmed SNe Ia (0.3<z<0.9) to differentiate between competing models for Dark Energy. We fit the multicolor lightcurves of the candidates to determine which are likely SNe Ia and send them for follow-up spectroscopy to the Keck, VLT, and Gemini telescopes. Here we show the results from Gemini, where we send most of our highest redshift (0.6<z<0.9) targets.
Mass-fractionation enriches light elements and the lighter isotopes of each element at the solar surface, making a photosphere that is 91 percent H and 9 percent He. The solar interior consists mostly of elements that comprise 99 percent of ordinary meteorites (Fe, O, Ni, Si, S, Mg and Ca) elements made in the deep interior of a supernova. Solar energy arises from a series of nuclear reactions triggered by neutron-emission from the collapsed supernova core on which the Sun formed. Solar mass-fractionation, solar neutrinos, and the annual solar-wind outpouring of 3 E43 H atoms from the solar surface are by-products of solar luminosity.
New simulations demonstrate that low-mode, nonradial hydrodynamic instabilities of the accretion shock help starting hot-bubble convection in supernovae and thus support explosions by the neutrino-heating mechanism. The prevailing conditions depend on the high-density equation of state which governs stellar core collapse, core bounce, and neutron star formation. Tests of this sensitivity to nuclear physics variations are shown for spherically symmetric models. Implications of current explosion models for r-process nucleosynthesis are addressed.
A detailed description of the apparent light curves of microlensed SNe Ia as extended and expanding sources is presented. We show that microlensing amplification can have significant effects on supernova observation. A model light curve is used to compare lensed and unlensed cases and we find that significant changes in shape can occur because of microlensing. We briefly discuss the probability of observing such effects as well. Throughout the paper we consider the redshift of the source to be 1.0 and we limit our work to spherically symmetric deflectors.
Recent observations on the redshift and magnitude of distant supernovae have raised fundamental questions of the cosmological structure and the development of space. Interpretation of the observations with the standard cosmology model suggests accelerating expansion of space which requires an assumption of unknown dark energy working against gravitation at cosmological distances. This paper presents an analysis which shows that the observed magnitude redshift relationship is in an excellent agreement with the prediction derived by assuming a zero energy balance of motion and gravitation in an expanding 4-sphere. Such an approach can be regarded as Einstein-deSitter expansion in the fourth dimension, suggesting a decelerating expansion velocity until zero in infinity.
Measurements of SN rates in different environments and redshifts can shed light on the nature of SN-Ia progenitors, star formation history, and chemical enrichment history. I summarize some recent work by our group in this area, and discuss the implications. The current evidence favors production of most of the iron in the ICM (and perhaps everywhere) by core-collapse SNe, rather than SNe-Ia. These SNe may have been produced by the first, top-heavy-IMF, generation of stars that reionized the Universe. Improved rate measurements can sharpen the picture, and I describe our recent efforts in this direction.
The detection of a soft thermal X-ray component in the spectrum of a bright knot in the halo of the plerion G21.5-0.9 is reported. Using a collisional ionization equilibrium model for an hot optically thin plasma, a temperature $kT=0.12-0.24$ kev, a mass of 0.3--1.0 M$_\odot$ and a density of 1.6-6 cm$^{-3}$ is derived. The spectral analysis suggests a possible overabundance of Silicon with respect to the solar value in the knot; if this will be confirmed this object may be a clump of shocked ejecta.
A brief description of the deformed spectra of microlensed SNe Ia is presented. We show that microlensing amplification can have significant effects on line profiles. The resonance-scattering code SYNOW is used to compute the intensity profile in the rest frame of the supernova. The observed (microlensed) spectral lines are predicted assuming a simple stellar-size deflector, and are compared to unlensed cases to show the effects microlensing by solar-size deflectors can have on spectral lines. We limit our work to spherically symmetric deflectors.
We present the results of a long-term program of monitoring of the famous SN 1995N, observed both in photometry (UBVRIJHK bands) and optical spectroscopy. The observations span a period of about 9 years. These new data, together with others available in literature, extend from the X-ray wavelengths to the radio, and allow to estimate the total energy radiated by the supernova over a decade after its explosion.
Many authors have used one-component plasma simulations in discussing the role of ion-ion correlations in reducing neutrino opacities during the collapse phase of a supernova. In a multicomponent plasma in which constituent ions have even a small range of N/Z ratios neutrino opacities are much larger, in some regions of parameters, than for the case of a one component plasma.
The status of core collapse supernoova progenitor models is reviewed with a focus on some of the current uncertainties arising from the difficulties of modeling important macrophysics and microphysics. In particular, I look at issues concerned with modeling convection, the implications of the still uncertain 12C(alpha,gamma)16O reaction rate, the uncertainties involved with the incorporation of mass loss, rotation, and magnetic fields in the stellar models, and the possible generation of global instabilities in stellar models at the late evolutionary stages.
We extend a low Mach number hydrodynamics method developed for terrestrial combustion, to the study of thermonuclear flames in Type Ia supernovae. We discuss the differences between 2-D and 3-D Rayleigh-Taylor unstable flame simulations, and give detailed diagnostics on the turbulence, showing that the kinetic energy power spectrum obeys Bolgiano-Obukhov statistics in 2-D, but Kolmogorov statistics in 3-D. Preliminary results from 3-D reacting bubble calculations are shown, and their implications for ignition are discussed.
The strong shocks in young supernova remnants (SNRs) should accelerate cosmic rays (CRs) and no doubt exists that relativistic electrons are produced in SNRs. However, direct evidence that SNRs produce CR nuclei depends on seeing an unambiguous pion-decay feature and this has not yet been obtained. Nevertheless, the lack of an observed pion-decay feature does not necessarily mean that CR ions are not abundantly produced since ions do not radiate efficiently. If CR ions are produced efficiently by diffusive shock acceleration (DSA), their presence will modify the hydrodynamics of the SNR and produce morphological effects which can be clearly seen in radiation produced by electrons.
In the framework of test-particle and cosmic-ray modified hydrodynamics, we calculate synchrotron emission radial profiles in young ejecta-dominated supernova remnants (SNRs) evolving in an ambient medium which is uniform in density and magnetic field. We find that, even without any magnetic field amplification by Raleigh-Taylor instabilities, the radio synchrotron emission peaks at the contact discontinuity because the magnetic field is compressed and is larger there than at the forward shock. The X-ray synchrotron emission sharply drops behind the forward shock as the highest energy electrons suffer severe radiative losses.
The accelerating expansion of the Universe is one of the most surprising and potentially profound discoveries of modern cosmology. Measuring the acceleration well enough to meaningfully constrain interesting physical models requires improvements an order of magnitude beyond on-going and near-term experiments. The Supernova/Acceleration Probe (SNAP) has been conceived as a powerful yet simple experiment to use Type Ia supernovae and weak gravitational lensing to reach this level of accuracy. As fundamentally different causes for the acceleration map into very small differences in observational parameters for all relevant cosmological methods, control of systematics is especially important and so has been built into the SNAP mission design from the very beginning.
We constrain the evolution of the dark energy density from Cosmic Microwave Background, Large Scale Structure and Supernovae Ia measurements. While Supernovae Ia are most sensitive to the equation of state $w_0$ of dark energy today, the Cosmic Microwave Background and Large Scale Structure data best constrains the dark energy evolution at earlier times. For the parametrization used in our models, we find $w_0 < -0.8$ and the dark energy fraction at very high redshift $\Omega_{early} < 0.03$ at 95 per cent confidence level.
The supernova explosion of 1054 AD, which originated the Crab Nebula and Pulsar, is probably the astronomical event which has been most deeply studied by means of historical sources. However, many mysteries and inconsistencies, both among the different sources and between what is deduced by the historical records and the present day astronomical data, are demanding extraordinary efforts by theoretical astrophysicists in order to put all the data in a meaningful framework. An accurate analysis of the historical sources, like the one we are presenting here, may contribute to solve some of these problems.
We consider nearby young black holes formed after supernova explosions in close binaries whose secondary components are currently observed as the so-called runaway stars. Using data on runaway stars and making reasonable assumptions about the mechanisms of supernova explosions and binary breakup, we estimate the present position of nearby young black holes. For two objects, we obtained relatively small error regions ($\sim 50$-100 deg$^2$). The possibility of detecting these nearby young black holes is discussed.
While the origin of r-process nuclei remains a long-standing mystery, recent spectroscopic studies of extremely metal-poor stars in the Galactic halo strongly suggest that it is associated with core-collapse supernovae. In this article, an overview of the recent theoretical studies of the r-process is presented with a special emphasis on the astrophysical scenarios related to core-collapse supernovae. We also review a recent progress of the Galactic chemical evolution studies as well as of the spectroscopic studies of extremely metal-poor halo stars, which provide us important clues to better understanding of the astrophysical r-process site.
Observations with the ACS Wide Field Camera and G800L grism can produce thousands of spectra within a single WFC field producing a potentially rich treasure trove of information. However, the data are complicated to deal with. Here we describe algorithms to find and characterize spectra of emission line galaxies and supernovae using tools we have developed in conjunction with off the shelf software.
Supernovae are nature's grandest explosions and an astrophysical laboratory in which unique conditions exist that are not achievable on Earth. They are also the furnaces in which most of the elements heavier than carbon have been forged. Scientists have argued for decades about the physical mechanism responsible for these explosions. It is clear that the ultimate energy source is gravity, but the relative roles of neutrinos, fluid instabilities, rotation and magnetic fields continue to be debated.
We use the Riess et al.(2004) supernova Ia apparent magnitude versus redshift data and the Allen et al.(2004) galaxy cluster gas mass fraction versus redshift data to constrain dark energy models. These data provide complementary constraints that when combined together ignificantly restrict model parameters and favor lowly-evolving dark energy density models, close to the Einstein cosmological constant limit of dark energy.
Assuming only a homogeneous and isotropic universe and using both the 'Gold' Supernova Type Ia sample of Riess et al. and the results from the Supernova Legacy Survey, we calculate the Bayesian evidence of a range of different parameterizations of the deceleration parameter. We consider both spatially flat and curved models. Our results show that although there is strong evidence in the data for an accelerating universe, there is little evidence that the deceleration parameter varies with redshift.
We show that the dipole of the luminosity distance is a useful observational tool which allows us to determine the Hubble parameter as a function of the redshift H(z). We determine the number of supernovae needed to achieve a given precision for H(z) and to distinguish between different models for dark energy. We analyse a sample of nearby supernovae and find a dipole consistent with the cosmic microwave background at a significance of more than 2 sigma.
The role of Supernova Remnants (SNRs) for the production of the Galactic Cosmic Rays is reviewed from the point of view of theory and very high energy gamma-ray experiments. The point is made that theory can describe young SNRs very well, if the evidence from the synchrotron emission is used to empirically determine several parameters of the theory, and thus theory can predict the relative contributions of hadronic and leptonic gamma rays at TeV energies. This is exemplified for several objects that have been observed intensively during the last years. Future key observations are discussed.
We explore the importance of anisotropic thermal conduction in the evolution of supernova remnants via numerical simulations. The mean temperature of the bubble of hot gas is decreased by a factor of ~3 compared to simulations without thermal conduction, together with an increase in the mean density of hot gas by a similar factor. Thus, thermal conduction greatly reduces the volume of hot gas produced over the life of the remnant. This underscores the importance of thermal conduction in estimating the hot gas filling fraction and emissivities in high-stage ions in Galactic and proto-galactic ISMs.
In the previous papers we derived cosmological equations for models with Gurzadyan-Xue dark energy, have performed their qualitative analysis and, particularly, have revealed a remarkable hidden invariance in the models with respect to the separatrix $\Omega_{sep}$ in their phase portraits. Now, new analytic solutions for these models are obtained, showing additional symmetries at various curvatures. The likelihood analysis with supernovae and radio galaxies data and their characteristics (age, the deceleration parameter), again demonstrate the crucial role of the $\Omega_{sep}$ for all models, in spite of the diversity of both, the initial equations and their solutions.
I touch upon some of the discoveries made by the Swift Team during the first 18 months of operation focusing on a few critical points. In addition to the early afterglows and complete coverage of the light curves, we mention the discovery of the location of Short bursts, the statistics on flares that is under completion and refer to their explanation as due to internal shocks. The full understanding of the connection with supernovae and the study of high z flares will ultimately lead to the detailed understanding of the mechanism of explosion both for GRBs and for Supernovae.
Based on the magnetorotational model of a supernova explosion with core collapse, we investigate the significant processes of neutrino heating of the supernova shock. These processes should be taken into account in self-consistent modeling, since the neutrino heating mechanism is capable of increasing the explosion efficiency. We show that, even in the presence of a strong magnetic field in the shock formation region, the heating rate is determined with good accuracy by the absorption and emission of neutrinos in direct URCA processes. Moreover, the influence on them of a magnetic field is reduced to insignificant corrections.
We simulate cosmic chemical enrichment with a hydrodynamical model including supernova and hypernova feedback. We find that the majority of stars in present-day massive galaxies formed in much smaller galaxies at high redshifts, despite their late assembly times. The hypernova feedback drives galactic outflows efficiently in low mass galaxies, and these winds eject heavy elements into the intergalactic medium. The ejected baryon fraction is larger for less massive galaxies, correlates well with stellar metallicity. The observed mass-metallicity relation is well reproduced as a result of the mass-dependent galactic winds. We also predict the cosmic supernova and gamma-ray burst rate histories.
We use the distribution, and particularly the skewness, of high redshift type Ia supernovae brightnesses relative to the low redshift sample to constrain the density of macroscopic compact objects (MCOs) in the universe. The data favors dark matter made of microscopic particles (such as the LSP) at 89% confidence. Future data will greatly improve this limit. This constraint is valid for a range in MCO mass from 10^-2 Msun to 10^10 Msun. Combined with other constraints, MCOs larger than one tenth the mass of Earth (~ 10^-7 Msun) can be eliminated as the sole constituent of dark matter.
The gravitational core collapse of a star produces a huge burst of neutrinos of all flavors. A number of detectors worldwide are sensitive to such a burst; its detection would yield information about both particle physics and astrophysics. Sensitivity to all flavors, and ability to tag different interactions, will be key for extraction of information. Here I will survey the capabilities of current and future detectors for detection of supernova neutrinos from the Milky Way and beyond.
We explore an analytic model of the accretion shock in the post bounce phase of a core-collapse supernova explosion. We find growing oscillations of the shock in the l=1 and l=2 modes, in agreement with a variety of existing numerical simulations. For modest values of the ratio of the outer accretion shock to that of the inner boundary to the shocked flow, the instability appears to derive from the growth of trapped sound waves, whereas at higher values, postshock advection clearly plays a role. Thus the model described here may relate to the different mechanisms of instability recently advocated by Blondin & Mezzacappa, and by Foglizzo and collaborators.
Increasing observational evidence gathered especially in X-rays and gamma-rays during the course of the last few years support the notion that Supernova remnants (SNRs) are Galactic particle accelerators up to energies close to the ``knee'' in the energy spectrum of Cosmic rays. This review summarises the current status of VHE gamma-ray observations of SNRs. Shell-type as well as plerionic type SNRs are addressed and prospect for observations of these two source classes with the upcoming GLAST satellite in the energy regime above 100 MeV are given.
In this paper, a parameterized deceleration parameter $q(z)= 1/2 - a/(1 + z)^b$ is reconstructed from the latest type Ia supernovae gold dataset. It is found out that the transition redshift from decelerated expansion to accelerated expansion is at $z_T=0.35^{+0.14}_{-0.07}$ with $1\sigma$ confidence level in this parameterized deceleration parameter. And, the best fit values of parameters in $1\sigma$ errors are $a=1.56^{+0.99}_{-0.55}$ and $b=3.82^{+3.70}_{-2.27}$.
We illustrate the constraints that a possible detection of a non-trivial spatial topology may place on the cosmological density parameters by considering the $\Lambda$CDM model Poincar\'e dodecahedal space (PDS) topology as a circles-in-the-sky detectable topology. To this end we reanalyze the type Ia supernovae constraints on the density parameter plane $\Omega_k$--$\Omega_{\Lambda}$ and show that a circles-in-the-sky detectable PDS topology gives rise to important constraints on this parameters plane.
Interstellar superbubbles generated by multiple supernova explosions are common in star-forming galaxies. They are the most obvious manifestation of mechanical feedback, and are largely responsible for transferring both thermal and kinetic energy to the interstellar medium from the massive star population. However, the details of this energy transfer remain surprisingly murky when individual objects are studied. I will summarize what we currently know about candidate dominant processes on these scales.
A core-collapse supernova might produce large amplitude gravitational waves if, through the collapse process, the inner core can aquire enough rotational energy to become dynamically unstable. In this report I present the results of 3-D numerical simulations of core collapse supernovae. These simulations indicate that for some initial conditions the post-collapse inner core is indeed unstable. However, for the cases considered, the instability does not produce a large gravitational-wave signal.
We define the cosmological parameters $H_{c,0}$, $\Omega_{m,c}$ and $\Omega_{\Lambda, c}$ within the Conformal Cosmology as obtained by the homogeneous approximation to the conformal-invariant generalization of Einstein's General Relativity theory. We present the definitions of the age of the universe and of the luminosity distance in the context of this approach. A possible explanation of the recent data from distant supernovae Ia without a cosmological constant is presented.
The recent observations of type Ia supernovae strongly support that the universe is accelerating now and decelerated in the recent past. This may be the evidence of the breakdown of the standard Friemann equation. We consider a general modified Friedmann equation. Three different models are analyzed in detail. The current supernovae data and the Wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe data are used to constrain these models. A detailed analysis of the transition from the deceleration phase to the acceleration phase is also performed.
We consider a cosmological model with a variable gravitational constant, G, based on a scalar-tensor theory. Using the recent observational data for the Hubble diagram of type Ia supernovae (SNeIa) we find a phenomenological expression describing the variation of G. The corresponding variation of the fine structure constant \alpha within multidimensional theories is also computed and is shown not to support known constraints on \Delta \alpha / \alpha.
We consider a special class of the tetrad theory of gravitation which can be considered as a viable alternative gravitational theories. We investigate cosmological models based on those theories by examining the possibility of fitting the recent astronomical measurement of supernova Ia magnitude versus shift. Our investigations result in a reasonable fit for the supernova data without introducing a cosmological constant. Thus, cosmological models based on tetradic theory of gravitation can provide alternatives to dark energy models.
World-wide, several detectors currently running or nearing completion are sensitive to a core collapse supernova neutrino signal in the Galaxy. I will briefly describe the nature of the neutrino signal and then survey current and future detection techniques. I will also explore what physics and astrophysics we can learn from the next Galactic core collapse.
I discuss the state of the art in the search for neutrinos from galactic stellar collapses and the future perspectives of this field. The implications for the neutrino physics of a high statistics supernova neutrino burst detection by the network of detectors operating around the world are also reviewed.
We calculate limits on the properties of neutrinos using data from gamma-ray detectors on the Pioneer Venus Orbiter and Solar Max Mission satellites. A massive neutrino decaying in flight from the supernova would produce gamma rays detectable by these instruments. The lack of such a signal allows us to constrain the mass, radiative lifetime, and branching ratio to photons of a massive neutrino species produced in the supernova. Presented at Beyond The Standard Model III, June, 1992.
We revisit the constraints implied by SN 1987 A observations on the decay rate of a multi-MeV $\nu_\tau$ decaying into the visible channel $\nu_\tau \rightarrow e^+ e^- \nu_e$, if its lifetime is more than 10 {\it sec.}. We discuss its implication for the minimal left-right symmetric model with see-saw mechanism for neutrino masses. We also speculate on the possible formation of a ``giant Capacitor" in intergalactic space due to the decay of "neutronization" $\nu_\tau$'s and spin allignment possibility in the supernova.
We consider active-sterile neutrino conversions in a supernova in the presence of random magnetic field domains. For large enough fields the magnetization of the medium may enhance the active to sterile neutrino conversion rates. Neglecting neutrino transition magnetic moments we show that for KeV neutrino mass squared differences these limits may overcome those that would apply in the isotropic case.
Astrophysical implications of neutrino mass and mixings are discussed. The status of solar and atmospheric neutrino problems, and recent developments concerning nuclear physics input to solar models and solar opacities are reviewed. Implications of neutrino mass and mixings in supernova dynamics are explored. The effects of supernova density fluctuations in neutrino propagation is described.
{Large enough random magnetic fields may affect in an important way neutrino conversion rates, even in the case where neutrinos have zero transition magnetic moments. We consider their effect in the case of active to sterile \neu conversions in a supernova and show that for KeV neutrino masses these limits may overcome those derived for the case of zero magnetic field.}
The role of matter enhanced resonant neutrino oscillations in reviving a stalled shock in a type-II supernova through delayed neutrino heating is investigated. The extent of neutrino heating is estimated for the allowed possibility of complete flavour conversion self-consistently with the changes in nuclear equilibrium. The average internal energy per nucleon is substantially increased indicating the possiblty of a robust explosion.
Core collapse supernovae are dominated by weakly interacting neutrinos. This provides a unique opportunity for macroscopic parity violation. We speculate that parity violation in a strong magnetic field can lead to an asymmetry in the explosion and a recoil of the newly formed neutron star. We estimate the asymmetry from neutrino-polarized-neutron elastic scattering, polarized electron capture and neutrino-nucleus elastic scattering in a (partially) polarized electron gas.
Mohanty and Samal have shown that the magnetic-moment interaction with nucleons contributes significantly to the photon dispersion relation in a supernova core, and with an opposite sign relative to the usual plasma effect. Because of a numerical error they overestimated the magnetic-moment term by two orders of magnitude, but it is still of the same order as the plasma effect. It appears that the Cherenkov processes gamma+nu -> nu and nu -> nu+gamma remain forbidden, but a final verdict depends on a more detailed investigation of the dynamical magnetic susceptibility of a hot nuclear medium.
The resonant transition effects MSW and NSFP for three flavour Majorana neutrinos in a supernova are considered, where the transition magnetic moments are likely to play a relevant role in neutrino physics. In this scenario, the deformed thermal neutrino distributions are obtained for different choices of the electron-tau mixing angle. Detailed predictions for the future large neutrino detectors are also given in terms of the ratio between the spectra of recoil electrons for deformed and undeformed spectra.
We study the effect of including flavor changing neutral currents (FCNC) in the analysis of the neutrino signal of a supernova burst. When we include the effect of the FCNC which are beyond the standard model (SM) in the study of the MSW resonant conversion, we obtain dramatic changes in the \Delta m^2-sin^2(2\theta) probability contours for neutrino detection.
Cosmology yields the most restrictive limits on neutrino masses and conversely, massive neutrinos would contribute to the cosmic dark-matter density and would play an important role for the formation of structure in the universe. Neutrino oscillations may well solve the solar neutrino problem and can have a significant impact on supernova physics. The neutrino signal from a future galactic supernova could provide evidence for cosmologically interesting neutrino masses or set interesting limits.
This talk summarizes our recent work which studied the impact of resonant neutrino conversion induced by some non-standard neutrino properties beyond mass and mixing, such as neutrino magnetic moment, lepton-flavor non-universality as well as flavor changing neutral current interactions in SUSY models with broken R parity, on supernova physics.
Adding singlet neutrinos to the standard model spectrum in general gives rise to Z-induced flavor-changing neutral currents. We study the impact of these currents on matter-induced neutrino oscillations in the sun and in supernovae. While the effects for solar neutrinos are negligible, dramatic effects are possible for supernova neutrinos.
We consider main ingredients which determine neutrino transformations in media. Strong transformations relevant for the astrophysics can be due to large depth oscillations, resonance conversion, parametric resonance effect, interplay of oscillations and inelastic collisions. Properties of transitions are discussed using the graphic representation. The applications of the transitions to supernova neutrinos are described. The supernova neutrinos can probe whole neutrino mass spectrum. Their studies will help to identify the pattern of neutrino mass and mixing.
The neutrinos from galactic supernovae can be detected by the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory and the Super-Kamiokande. The effect of neutrino mass can show up in the observed neutrino signal by (i) delay in the time of flight and (ii) distortion of the neutrino energy spectrum due to flavor mixing. We discuss a combination of the two effects for both charged and neutral current processes in the detectors for realistic three flavor scenarios and show that neutrino flavor mixing can lead to non-trivial changes in the event rate as a function of time.
The KARMEN experiment observes a time anomaly in events induced by pion decay at rest. This anomaly can be ascribed to the production of a new weakly interacting particle X with mass m_X\sim 34 MeV. We show that a recently proposed identification of the X particle with the lightest neutralino \chi in the frame work of the MSSM with broken R parity is in contradiction to optical observations of type II supernovae.
The type II supernova is considered as a candidate site for the production of heavy elements. Since the supernova produces an intense neutrino flux, neutrino scattering processes will impact element formation. We examine active-sterile neutrino conversion in this environment and find that it may help to produce the requisite neutron-to-seed ratio for synthesis of the r-process elements.
We study the possible impact of the neutrino oscillation which could be induced by a tiny violation of equivalence principle (VEP) for neutrinos emitted from supernova driven by gravitational collapse. Due to the absence of any significant indication of neutrino oscillation in the SN1987A data, we obtain sever bounds on relevant VEP parameters \delta \gamma\lsim O(10^{-31}) for massless or degenerated neutrinos and \delta \gamma \lsim O(10^{-16})\times [\Delta m^2/10^{-5} eV^2] for massive neutrinos.
Recent work on neutrino propagation in stochastic media and its implications for the Sun and core-collapse supernovae are reviewed. It is shown that recent results from Sudbury Neutrino Observatory and SuperKamiokande combined with a best global fit value of $\delta m^2= 5\times 10^{-5}$ eV$^2$ and $\tan^2 \theta = 0.3$ rule out solar electron density fluctuations of a few percent or more. It is argued that solar neutrino experiments may be able to rule out even smaller fluctuations in the near future.
The level-crossing probability, local and global adiabaticity conditions are discussed for 2-flavour neutrino oscillations in matter with arbitrary mixing angle $\theta$. Different approximations for the survival probability of supernova neutrinos are compared. Results of a combined likelihood analysis of the observed SN1987A neutrino signal and of the latest solar neutrino data including the recent SNO CC measurement are presented.
In models with large extra dimensions all gauge singlet fields can in principle propagate in the extra dimensional space. We have investigated possible constraints on majoron models of neutrino masses in which the majorons propagate in extra dimensions. It is found that astrophysical constraints from supernovae are many orders of magnitude stronger than previous accelerator bounds. Our findings suggest that unnatural types of the "see-saw" mechanism for neutrino masses are unlikely to occur in nature, even in the presence of extra dimensions.
We examine active-sterile neutrino conversion in the late time post-core-bounce supernova environment. By including the effect of feedback on the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein (MSW) conversion potential, we obtain a large range of neutrino mixing parameters which produce a favorable environment for the r-process. We look at the signature of this effect in the current generation of neutrino detectors now coming on line. We also investigate the impact of the neutrino-neutrino forward scattering-induced potential on the MSW conversion.
The type II supernova is considered as a candidate site for the production of heavy elements. The nucleosynthesis occurs in an intense neutrino flux, we calculate the electron fraction in this environment.
We consider the possibility that there exist sterile neutrinos which are closely degenerate in mass with the active neutrinos and mixed with them. We investigate the effects of this kind of active-sterile neutrino mixing on the composition of supernova neutrino flux at the Earth. If an adiabatic MSW-transition between active and sterile neutrinos takes place, it could dramatically diminish the electron neutrino flux.
In my diploma thesis I calculate a lower mass bound of the lightest nutralino assuming an additional supernova cooling mechanism. I consider elektron-positron annihilation and nucleon-nucleon bremsstrahlung as cooling processes. These cooling processes must not be too effective because they would destroy the neutrino signal (SN 1987a). From this requirement I derive an upper bound for the emitted energy and as a consequence I get a lower bound for the mass of the lightest neutralino.
We apply Bayesian methods to study the sensitivity to neutrino masses of a Galactic supernova neutrino signal. Our procedure makes use of the full statistics of events and is remarkably independent of astrophysical assumptions. Present detectors can reach a sensitivity down to $m_\nu \sim 1$ eV. Future megaton detectors can yield up to a factor of two improvement; however, they will not be competitive with the next generation of tritium $\beta$-decay and neutrinoless double $\beta$-decay experiments.
Observing a high-statistics neutrino signal from a galactic supernova (SN) would allow one to test the standard delayed explosion scenario and may allow one to distinguish between the normal and inverted neutrino mass ordering due to the effects of flavor oscillations in the SN envelope. One may even observe a signature of SN shock-wave propagation in the detailed time-evolution of the neutrino spectra. A clear identification of flavor oscillation effects in a water Cherenkov detector probably requires a megatonne-class experiment.
When the neutral current neutrino-neutrino interaction is treated completely, rather than as an interaction among angle-averaged distributions, or as a set of flavor-diagonal effective potentials, the result can be flavor mixing at a speed orders of magnitude faster than that one would anticipate from the measured neutrino oscillation parameters. It is possible that the energy spectra of the three active species of neutrinos emerging from a supernova are nearly identical.
In a recent paper, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 211101 (2005) [hep-ph/0502166], Schmitt et al. have proposed a new mechanism to explain the observed velocities of pulsars. The proposed explanation is based on anisotropic emission of neutrinos from a cooling neutron star at temperatures below 0.1 MeV, thousands of years after the supernova. However, while neutrinos are copiously produced during the first minute of the supernova explosion, at later times the neutrino emission is negligible. Therefore, the proposed mechanism is not viable.
The sun and core-collapse supernovae produce neutrino spectra that are sensitive to the effects of masses and mixing. Current results from solar neutrino experiments provide perhaps our best evidence for such new neutrino physics, beyond the standard electroweak model. I discuss this evidence as well as the limited possibilities for more conventional explanations. If the resolution of the solar neutrino problem is $\nu_e \to \nu_\mu$ oscillations, standard seesaw estimates of $m_{\nu_\tau}$ suggest a cosmologically interesting third-generation neutrino. I discuss recent nucleosynthesis arguments that lead to an important constraint on this possibility.
We construct the equation of state (EOS) of nuclear matter at finite temperature and density with various proton fractions within the relativistic mean field (RMF) theory for the use in the supernova simulations. The Thomas-Fermi approximation is adopted to describe the non-uniform matter where we consider nucleus, alpha-particle, proton and neutron in equilibrium. We treat the uniform matter and non-uniform matter consistently using the RMF theory. We tabulate the outcome as the pressure, free energy, entropy etc, with enough mesh points in wide ranges of the temperature, proton fraction, and baryon mass density.
We calculate supernova electron capture and beta decay rates for various pf-shell nuclei using large-scale shell model techniques. We show that the centroid of the Gamow-Teller strength distribution has been systematically misplaced in previous rate estimates. Our total electron capture rates are significantly smaller than currently adopted in core collapse calculations, while the total beta decay rates change less. Our calculation shows that for electron-to-baryon ratios Ye=0.42-0.46 beta decay rates are larger than the competing electron capture rates.
The relationship among nuclear structure, the weak processes in nuclei, and astrophysics becomes quite apparent in supernova explosion and nucleosynthesis studies. In this brief article, I report on progress made in the last few years on calculating electron capture and beta-decay rates in iron-group nuclei. I also report on applications of these rates to Type-Ia nucleosynthesis studies.
We study the neutral-current neutrino scattering for four nuclei in the iron region. We evaluate the cross sections for the relevant temperatures during the supernova core collapse and derive Gamow-Teller distributions from large-scale shell-model calculations. We show that the thermal population of the excited states significantly enhances the cross sections at low neutrino energies. Calculations of the outgoing neutrino spectra indicate the prospect of neutrino upscattering at finite temperatures. Both results are particularly notable in even-even nuclei.
We propose a new nucleosynthesis process in which various nuclei are formed through the liquid-gas phase transition of supernova matter as a preprocess of the standard r-process, and study its possibility of realization qualitatively.   In the relativistic mean field and statistical model calculations, we find that this process may take place and help the later r-process to proceed.
We point out that during the supernova II type explosion the thermodynamical condition of stellar matter between the protoneutron star and the shock front corresponds to the nuclear liquid-gas phase coexistence region, which can be investigated in nuclear multifragmentation reactions. We have demonstrated, that neutron-rich hot heavy nuclei can be produced in this region. The production of these nuclei may influence dynamics of the explosion and contribute to the synthesis of heavy elements.
Highly precise data on the magnetic dipole strength distributions from the Darmstadt electron linear accelerator for the nuclei 50Ti, 52Cr and 54Fe are dominated by isovector Gamow-Teller-like contributions and can therefore be translated into inelastic total and differential neutral-current neutrino-nucleus cross sections at supernova neutrino energies. The results agree well with large-scale shell-model calculations, validating this model.
We point out similarity of thermodynamic conditions reached in intermediate energy nuclear collisions and in supernova explosions. We show that a statistical approach, which has been previously applied for nuclear multifragmentation reactions, can be very useful for description of electro-neutral stellar matter. Then properties of hot unstable nuclei extracted from analysis of multifragmentation data can be used for construction of a realistic equation of state of supernova matter.
Two of the key issues in understanding the neutron-to-proton ratio in a core-collapse supernova are discussed. One of these is the behavior of the neutrino-nucleon cross sections as supernova energies. The other issue is the many-body properties of the neutrino gas near the core when both one- and two-body interaction terms are included.
The derivation of the ponderomotive force due to neutrinos by Hardy and Melrose, Phys.Rev.D v.54, p.6491 (1996) is based on a flawed analysis of the ponderomotive force concept. Their conclusions also contain an erroneous physical assumption related to the neutrino emission in supernovae. A correct analysis shows the importance of the ponderomotive force due to neutrinos in type II supernovae explosions.
Distances to well-observed Type II-P SNe are determined from an updated version of the Expanding Photosphere Method (EPM), based on recent theoretical models. The new EPM distances show good agreement with other independent distances to the host galaxies without any significant systematic bias, contrary to earlier results in the literature. The accuracy of the method is comparable with that of the distance measurements for Type Ia SNe.
The discovery of the acceleration of the rate of expansion of the Universe fosters new explorations of the behavior of gravitation theories in the cosmological context. Either the GR framework is valid but a cosmic component with a negative equation of state is dominating the energy--matter contents or the Universe is better described at large by a theory that departs from GR. In this review we address theoretical alternatives that have been explored through supernovae.
We study the structure of the circumstellar medium surrounding SN 1987A in the equatorial plane. Furthermore, we study the evolution of the SN shock within this medium during the first 25 years, and the resulting hard X-ray and radio emission from the remnant.
We consider the possibilities of studying a supernova collapse neutrino burst at Baksan Neutrino Observatory (Institute for Nuclear Research, Russian Academy of Sciences) using the prposed 5-kt target-mass liquid scintillation spectrometer. Attention is given to the influence of mixing angle ${\theta}_{13}$ on the expected rates and spectra of neutrino events.
Multiwavelength observations of SNR 1987A show that its morphology is rapidly changing at X-ray, radio, and optical wavelengths as the blast wave from the explosion expands into the circumstellar equatorial ring. Infrared emission arises from the interaction of dust grains with the hot X-ray emitting gas. We show that the IR emission provides important complementary information on the interaction of the SN blast wave with the circumstellar equatorial ring that cannot be obtained at any other wavelength.
The problem of extinction is the most important issue to be dealt with in the process of obtaining true absolute magnitudes of core-collapse supernovae (SNe). The plane-parallel model which gives absorption dependent on galaxy inclination, widely used in the past, was shown not to describe extinction adequately. We try to apply an alternative model which introduces radial ependence of extinction. A certain trend of dimmer SNe with decreasing radius from the center of a galaxy was found, for a chosen sample of stripped-envelope SNe.
Detection of 5 events by the Liquid Scintillation Detector (LSD) on February, 23, 1987 was interpreted in the literature as the detection of neutrinos from the first stage of the two-stage supernova collapse. We pose rigid constraints on the properties of the first stage of the collapse, taking into account neutrino flavour conversion due to the MSW-effect and general properties of supernova neutrino emission. The constraints depend on the unknown neutrino mass hierarchy and mixing angle \theta_{13}.
The onset of the thermonuclear runaway in a Chandrasekhar-mass white dwarf, leading to the explosion as a type Ia supernova, is studied with hydrodynamical simulations. We investigate the evolution of temperature fluctuations (``bubbles'') in the WD's convective core by means of 2D numerical simulations. We show how the occurrence of the thermonuclear runaway depends on various bubble parameters. The relevance of the progenitor's composition for the ignition process is also discussed.
Deconvolution algorithms have been used successfully for optimization/restoration/deblurring of astronomical images in a variety of wavelengths, especially in the optical band (e.g., for HST). We present here an iterative Richardson-Lucy type method designed for treatment of images obtained with the H.E.S.S. array of ground-based gamma-ray telescopes. Its application to shell-type supernova remnant images yields refined details relevant for the study of correlations with other wavelengths, and hence for interpretation in terms either of hadronic or leptonic origin of the observed VHE gamma-ray emission.
Central Compact Objects (CCOs) are a handful of soft X-ray sources located close to the centers of Supernova Remnants and supposed to be young, radio-quiet Isolated Neutron Stars (INSs). A clear understanding of their physics would be crucial in order to complete our view of the birth properties of INSs. We will review the phenomenologies of CCOs, underlining the most important, recent results, and we will discuss the possible relationships of such sources with other classes of INSs.
The proper motion of massive stars could cause them to explode far from the geometric centers of their wind-driven bubbles and thereby could affect the symmetry of the resulting diffuse supernova remnants. We use this fact to explain the origin of SNRs consisting of two partially overlapping shells (e.g. Cygnus Loop, 3C 400.2, etc.).
We have studied detailed nucleosynthesis in the shocked surface layers of an Oxygen-Neon-Magnesium core collapse supernova with an eye to determining if the conditions are suitable for r process nucleosynthesis. We find no such conditions in an unmodified model, but do find overproduction of N=50 nuclei (previously seen in early neutron-rich neutrino winds) in amounts that, if ejected, would pose serious problems for galactic chemical evolution.
The cosmological expansion of the universe affects the behaviour of all physical systems and, in the case of gravitationally bound ones, could correspond to or mimic a time dependent Newton's constant. Here we discuss the case of a locally spherical mass distribution embedded in a generic Robertson Walker universe. Choosing the most appropriate metric tensor for the problem and assuming that the local time scale is much much lower than the cosmic one, we show that G is practically unaffected thus leaving the absolute magnitude of type Ia supernovae unaltered at all epochs.
CCD BVRI photometry is presented for type II Supernovae 2004A and 2004ek. SN 2004A is found to be a typical SN II-P, with the shape of the light and color curves and maximum luminosity closely matching those for SN 1999em. SN 2004ek shows unusual light curves with long flat plateau in the B band, two peaks in the V and prominent brightening in the R and I bands, starting about 45 days past outburst. The brightness decline after the plateau stage is probably quite slow. The plateau luminosity is about 1.5 mag brighter than average for SN II-P.
In this talk I discuss properties of hot stellar matter at sub-nuclear densities which is formed in supernova explosions. I emphasize that thermodynamic conditions there are rather similar to those created in the laboratory by intermediate-energy heavy-ion collisions. Theoretical methods developed for the description of multi-fragment final states in such reactions can be used also for description of the stellar matter. I present main steps of the statistical approach to the equation of state and nuclear composition, dealing with an ensemble of nuclear species instead of one "average" nucleus.
This paper analyses cosmological observations within inhomogeneous and exact solutions of the Einstein equations. In some way the analyses presented here can be freed from assumptions such as small amplitude of the density contrast. The supernova observations are analysed using the Lema\itre-Tolman model and the CMB observations are analysed using the quasispherical Szekeres model. The results show that it is possible to fit the supernova data without the cosmological constant. However if inhomogeneities of sizes and amplitudes as observed in the local Universe are considered, their impact on cosmological observations is small.
We analyse the results of recent measurements of nonthermal emission from individual supernova remnants (SNRs) and their correspondence to the nonlinear kinetic theory of cosmic ray (CR) acceleration in SNRs. It is shown that the theory fits these data in a satisfactory way and provides the strong evidences for the efficient CR production in SNRs accompanied by significant magnetic field amplification. Magnetic field amplification leads to considerable increase of CR maximum energy so that the spectrum of CRs accelerated in SNRs is consistent with the requirements for the formation of Galactic CR spectrum up to the energy ~10^17 eV.
Establishing the origin of short-lived radionuclides (SLRs) with half-lives $\leq$ 100 Myr has important implications for the astrophysical context of our Sun's birth place. We review here the different origins proposed for the variety of SLRs present in the solar accretion disk 4.57 Ga ago. Special emphasis is given to an enhanced Galactic background origin for $^{60}$Fe which was inherited from several supernovae belonging to previous episodes of star formation, rather than from a nearby, contemporaneous supernova.
The gravitational lensing distortion of distant sources by the large-scale distribution of matter in the Universe has been extensively studied. In contrast, very little is known about the effects due to the large-scale distribution of dark energy. We discuss the use of Type Ia supernovae as probes of the spatial inhomogeneity and anisotropy of dark energy. We show that a shallow, almost all-sky survey can limit rms dark energy fluctuations at the horizon scale down to a fractional energy density of ~10^-4
The new results of a study of the kinematics of the supernova remnant S8 in the IC1613 galaxy are reported. The expansion velocity of the bright optical nebula is determined based on observations made with the 6-m telescope of the Special Astrophysical Observatory of the Russian Academy of Sciences using MPSF field spectrograph and SCORPIO focal reducer operating in the scanning Fabry--Perot interferometer mode. An analysis of 21-cm line VLA observations of the galaxy corroborates our earlier proposed model of a SN exploding inside a cavern surrounded by a dense shell and S8 colliding with the wall of the HI shell.
Radio continuum emission from the supernova remnant G296.5+10.0 was observed using the Australia Telescope Compact Array. Using a 104 MHz bandwidth split into 13 x 8 MHz spectral channels, it was possible to produce a pixel-by-pixel image of Rotation Measure (RM) across the entire remnant. A lack of correlation between RM and X-ray surface brightness reveals that the RMs originate from outside the remnant. Using this information, we will characterise the smooth component of the magnetic field within the supernova remnant and attempt to probe the magneto-ionic structure and turbulent scale sizes in the ISM and galactic halo along the line-of-sight.
The extremely luminous supernova SN2006gy is explained in the same way as other SNIIn events: light is produced by a radiative shock propagating in a dense circumstellar envelope formed by a previous weak explosion. The problems in the theory and observations of multiple-explosion SNe IIn are briefly reviewed.
Supernovae and radio galaxy redshift data are fitted in an alternative cosmology. The galaxies are assumed to recede with unchanging velocities in a static Robertson-Walker metric with a(t) = 1. An exact fit is obtained with no adjustable parameters. There is no indication that the recession velocities are changing with time, so no call for "dark energy".
In this review I summarize the role of supernova rate as a critical ingredient of modern astrophysics, and as an important tool to understand SN explosions. Many years of active observations and theoretical modeling have produced several important results. In particular, linking SN rates with parent stellar populations has proved to be an important strategy. Despite these advances, the situation is far from clear, in particular for the SNe Ia.
We present the analysis of an unpublished VLA archive observation made at 1.49 GHz in 1989 toward the supernova remnant G1.9+0.3, the youngest such Galactic object known. This observation agrees with the time evolution in angular size previously reported. We derive an expansion rate of 0.46 +- 0.11 % per year and an age of 220+45-70 yr for the remnant by comparing the 1985 and 1989 images.
Measuring the electron antineutrino component of the cosmic diffuse supernova neutrino background (DSNB) is the next ambitious goal for low-energy neutrino astronomy. The largest flux is expected in the lowest accessible energy bin. However, for E < 15 MeV a possible signal can be mimicked by a solar electron antineutrino flux that originates from the usual 8B neutrinos by spin-flavor oscillations. We show that such an interpretation is possible within the allowed range of neutrino electromagnetic transition moments and solar turbulent field strengths and distributions. Therefore, an unambiguous detection of the DSNB requires a significant number of events at E > 15 MeV.
Exploiting an improved analysis of the electronic antineutrinos signal from the explosion of a galactic core collapse supernova, we show that it is possible to identify within about ten milliseconds the time of the bounce, which is strongly correlated to the time of the maximum amplitude of the gravitational signal. This allows to precisely identify the gravitational wave burst timing.
The spectral emission of neutrinos from a plasma in nuclear statistical equilibrium (NSE) is investigated. Particular attention is paid to the possible emission of high energy (>10 MeV) neutrinos or antineutrinos. A newly developed numerical approach for describing the abundances of nuclei in NSE is presented. Neutrino emission spectra, resulting from general Fuller, Fowler, Newman (FFN) conditions, are analyzed. Regions of T-rho-Ye space favoring detectability are selected. The importance of critical Y_e values with zero net rate of neutronization (Ye dot) is discussed. Results are provided for the processing of matter under conditions typical for thermonuclear and core-collapse supernovae, pre-supernova stars, and neutron star mergers.
By assuming an aspherical stellar wind with an equatorial disk from a red giant, we investigate the production of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) via symbiotic channel. We estimate that the Galactic birthrate of SNe Ia via symbiotic channel is between $1.03\times 10^{-3}$ and $2.27\times 10^{-5}$ yr$^{-1}$, the delay time of SNe Ia has wide range from $\sim$ 0.07 to 5 Gyr. The results are greatly affected by the outflow velocity and mass-loss rate of the equatorial disk. Using our model, we discuss the progenitors of SN 2002ic and SN 2006X.
A recently proposed model (arXiv:0903.2794) explains the rise in energy of the positron fraction measured by the PAMELA satellite in terms of hadronic production of positrons in aged supernova remnants, and acceleration therein. Here we present a preliminary calculation of the anti-proton flux produced by the same mechanism. While the model is consistent with present data, a rise of the antiproton to proton ratio is predicted at high energy, which strikingly distinguishes this scenario from other astrophysical explanations of the positron fraction (like pulsars). We briefly discuss important implications for Dark Matter searches via antimatter.
Using moment equations we analyze collective flavor transformation of supernova neutrinos. We study the convergence of moment equations and find that numerical results using a few moment converge quite fast. We study effects of emission angle distribution of neutrinos on neutrino sphere. We study scaling law of the amplitude of neutrino self-interaction Hamiltonian and find that it depends on model of emission angle distribution of neutrinos. Dependence of neutrino oscillation on different models of emission angle distribution is studied.
A revised catalogue of 274 Galactic supernova remnants (SNRs) is presented, along with some simple statistics of their parameters. It is shown that the remnants that have recently been identified are generally faint, as is expected from the selection effects that apply to the identification of remnants.
The nature of the progenitor system[s] of Type Ia Supernovae is still unclear. In this contribution I review the projects that have been undertaken to answer this question and the results they have led to. The conclusion is that, as of today, we have reasonable guesses but none of them has yet been proven by direct observations.
Massive stars becoming red supergiants lose a significant amount of their mass during that brief evolutionary phase. They then either explode as a hydrogen-rich supernova (SN Type II), or continue to evolve as a hotter supergiant (before exploding). The slow, dusty ejecta of the red supergiant will be over-run by the hot star wind and/or SN ejecta. I will present estimates of the conditions for this interaction and discuss some of the implications.
The symmetry energy coefficients, incompressibility, and single-particle and isovector potentials of clusterized dilute nuclear matter are calculated at different temperatures employing the $S$-matrix approach to the evaluation of the equation of state. Calculations have been extended to understand the aforesaid properties of homogeneous and clusterized supernova matter in the subnuclear density region. Comparison of the results in the $S$-matrix and mean-field approach reveals some subtle differences in the density and temperature region we explore.
We briefly reviewed some recent progress on the studies of supernova remnants (SNRs), including the radio SNRs (the structure, polarization, spectrum etc.), observational characteristics of X-ray emission, pulsar wind nebulae (PWNe), association properties between SNR and PSR, interaction of SNR and interstellar medium (ISM), cosmos ray and the SNRs in external galaxies, etc.. Correspondingly to the continue improvement of space and spectrum resolution of the on-ground and in-space astronomical equipments at wavelengthes as radio, optical, X-ray and so on, we know about SNRs more and deeper.
There are either a near kinematic distance of 5.5 kpc or a far distance of 8.8 kpc for a Galactic supernova remnant (SNR) G32.8$-$0.1 derived by using the rotation curve of the Galaxy. Here we make sure that the remnant distance is the farther one 8.8 kpc through solving a group of equations for the shell-type remnants separately at the adiabatic-phase and the radiative-phase. For SNR G346.6$-$0.2 we determine its distance also the farther one 11 kpc rather than the nearer one 5.5 kpc.
The single-degenerate channel is widely accepted as the progenitors of type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). Following the work of Meng, Chen and Han (2009), we reproduced the birth rate and age of supernovae like SN 2006X by the single-degenerate model (WD + MS) with an optically thick wind, which may imply that the progenitor of SN 2006X is a WD + MS system.
We simulate the formation and evolution of galaxies with a self-consistent 3D hydrodynamical model including star formation, supernova feedback, and chemical enrichment. Hypernova feedback plays an essential role not only in solving the [Zn/Fe] problem, but also reproducing the cosmic star formation rate history and the mass-metallicity relations. In a Milky-Way type galaxy, kinematics and chemical abundances are different in bulge, disk, and thick disk because of different star formation histories and the contribution of Type Ia Supernovae.
We assess the importance of the magneto-rotational instability in core-collapse supernovae by an analysis of the growth rates of unstable modes in typical post-collapse systems and by numerical simulations of simplified models. The interplay of differential rotation and thermal stratification defines different instability regimes which we confirm in our simulations. We investigate the termination of the growth of the MRI by parasitic instabilities, establish scaling laws characterising the termination amplitude, and study the long-term evolution of the saturated turbulent state.
The present thesis aims to be an analysis of various aspects of neutrino phenomenology in two different scenarios. On the one hand, we address the study of non-standard neutrino interactions (NSI) in accelerator and reactor terrestrial experiments. On the other hand, we discuss the propagation of supernova (SN) neutrinos, taking into account the recent developments showing the importance that neutrino background may have in their evolution. This effect, neglected for a long time, may be of capital importance when trying to understand the neutrino signal from a future galactic SN. Our SN neutrino analysis is presented both in absence and presence of NSI.
As the Einstein equations are non-linear, spatial averaging and temporal evolution do not commute. Therefore, the evolution of the averaged universe is affected by inhomogeneities. It is, however, highly controversial how large these cosmological backreaction effects are. We use the supernova data of the Constitution set up to a redshift of 0.1 in order to analyse to what extent the measurement of the Hubble constant is affected. The size of the effect depends on the size of the volume that is averaged over. The observational results are then compared to the theory of the backreaction mechanism.
What do we mean by neutrino astronomy? Which information is it able to provide us and which is its potential? To address these questions, we discuss three among the most relevant sources of neutrinos: the Sun; the core collapse supernovae; the supernova remnants. For each of these astronomical objects, we describe the state of the art, we present the expectations and we outline the most actual problems from the point of view of neutrino astronomy.
We investigate a matter dominated navigation cosmological model. The influence of a possible drift (wind) in the navigation cosmological model makes the spacetime geometry change from Riemannian to Finslerian. The evolution of the Finslerian Universe is governed by the same gravitational field equation with the familiar Friedmann-Robertson-Walker one. However, the change of space geometry from Riemannian to Finslerian supplies us a new relation between the luminosity distant and redshift. It is shown that the Hubble diagram based on this new relation could account for the observations on distant Type Ia supernovae.
I describe here some features of a non-geometrical approach to quantum gravity which leads to another picture of ties of gravitation and cosmology. The role of taking into account the effect of time dilation of the standard cosmological model is considered. It is shown that the correction for no time dilation leads to a good accordance of Supernovae 1a data and predictions of the considered model. The distributions of stretch factor values of Supernovae 1a for the cases of time dilation and no time dilation are discussed.
CCD BVRI photometry is presented for type Ia supernova 2008gy. The light curves match the template curves for fast-declining SN Ia, but the colors appear redder than average, and the SN may also be slightly subluminous. SN 2008gy is found to be located far outside the boundaries of three nearest galaxies, each of them has nearly equal probability to be the host galaxy.
Neutrinos emitted from a supernova encode useful information about neutrino physics and astrophysics. Interpreting the neutrino signal depends crucially on understanding neutrino production, flavor mixing during propagation, and detection. In this talk, we review the physics potential of a SN neutrino observation.
We present preliminary results from multidimensional numerical studies of pair instability supernova (PSN), studying the fluid instabilities that occur in multiple spatial dimensions. We use the new radiation-hydrodynamics code, CASTRO, and introduce a new mapping procedure that defines the initial conditions for the multidimensional runs in such a way that conservation of physical quantities is guaranteed at any level of resolution.
In this paper, we test the consistency of Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs) Data-set and Supernovae Union2 (SNU2) via the so-called {\it multi-dimensional consistency test} under the assumption that $\Lambda$CDM model is a potentially correct cosmological model. We find that the probes are inconsistent with $1.456\sigma$ and $85.47%$ in terms of probability. With this observation, it is concluded that GRBs can be combined with SNU2 to constrain cosmological models.
The origin of Galactic cosmic-ray ions has remained an enigma for almost a century. Although it has generally been thought that they are accelerated in the shock waves associated with powerful supernova explosions-for which there have been recent claims of evidence-the mystery is far from resolved. In fact, we may be on the wrong track altogether in looking for isolated regions of cosmic-ray acceleration.
Recent observations of near supernova show that the acceleration expansion of Universe decreases. This phenomenon is called the transient acceleration. In the second part of work we consider the 3-component Universe composed of a scalar field, interacting with the dark matter on the agegraphic dark energy background. We show that the transient acceleration appears in frame of such a model. The obtained results agree with the latest cosmological observations, namely, the 557 SNIa sample (Union2) was released by the Supernova Cosmology Project (SCP) Collaboration.
We consider the possibility of observing supernova (SN) - gamma-ray burst (GRB) pairs separated by several years. These energetic events correspond to the second SN explosion in a double star system followed by the formation of the very short-lived pair of compact objects and finally by the GRB generation after their merge. Possible connection of SN 1997ds and GRB 990425 is discussed.
The aim of this paper is to provide a model of relationship between the number of galaxies and the rate of type Ia supernovae (SNe). In addition, present approach prepares a framework to analyze this relationship and its dependence on the redshif, giving aid to the deepening of studies on radial distribution of galaxies. The work also shows how the ratio of counts entails to the topological aspects regarding the evolution of the universe itself from z ~ 2. The relationships refer directly to the redshift apart from morphological considerations.
We show that a collisionless shock necessarily forms during the shock breakout of a supernova (SN) surrounded by an optically thick wind. An intense non-thermal flash of <~ MeV gamma rays, hard X-rays and multi-TeV neutrinos is produced simultaneously with and following the soft X-ray breakout emission, carrying similar or larger energy than the soft emission. The non-thermal flash is detectable by current X-ray telescopes and may be detectable out to 10's of Mpc by km-scale neutrino telescopes.
The rate of ionization by cosmic rays in interstellar gas directly associated with gamma-ray emitting supernova remnants is for the first time calculated to be several orders of magnitude larger than the Galactic average. Analysis of ionization-induced chemistry yields the first quantitative prediction of the astrophysical H_{2}^{+} emission line spectrum, which should be detectable together with H_3^+ lines. The predicted coincident observation of those emission lines and gamma-rays will help prove that supernova remnants are sources of cosmic rays.
We describe the propagation of supernova shocks within the surrounding medium, which may be due to mass-loss from the progenitor star. The structure and density profile of the ejected material and surrounding medium are considered. Shock wave interaction with clouds and wind-bubbles, and issues relevant to cosmic rays are briefly discussed.
With the aim of clarifying the nature of the supernova events from stars having initial (at the main sequence) masses larger than $\sim 8$-$10\,M_{\odot}$, we have developed a specifically tailored radiation hydrodynamics Lagrangian code, that enables us to simulate the evolution of the main observables (light curve, evolution of photospheric velocity and temperature) in these events. The code features and some test-case simulations as well as the possible applications of the code are briefly discussed.
With the aim of clarifying the nature of the core-collapse supernova events, we have developed a specifically tailored relativistic, radiation-hydrodynamics Lagrangian code, that enables us to simulate the evolution of the main observables (light curve, evolution of photospheric velocity and temperature) in these events. The code features, some testcase simulations and the possible applications of the code are briefly discussed.
A new law of motion for supernova remnant (SNR) which introduces the quantity of swept matter in the thin layer approximation is introduced. This new law of motion is tested on 10 years observations of SN1993J. The introduction of an exponential gradient in the surrounding medium allows to model an aspherical expansion. A weakly asymmetric SNR, SN1006, and a strongly asymmetric SNR, SN1987a, are modeled. In the case of SN1987a the three observed rings are simulated.
The rates of SN Ia for double-degenerate and single-degenerate scenario are computed for the models of spiral and elliptical galaxies. The number of nuclearly burning white dwarfs (NBWD) is traced. The data favours double-degenerate scenario and suggests lower number of NBWD per unit mass in ellipticals and their lower average mass as one of the reasons for the difference in the number of supersoft X-ray sources observed in the galaxies of different types.
A new numerical model of the nonlinear diffusive shock acceleration is presented. It is used for modeling of particle acceleration in supernova remnants. The model contains coupled spherically symmetric hydrodynamic equations and the transport equations for energetic protons, ions and electrons. The forward and reverse shocks are included in the consideration. The spectra of cosmic rays released into interstellar medium from a supernova remnant are determined. The role of the reverse shock in the production of CR ions and positrons is discussed.
We demonstrate that cosmic rays form filamentary structures in the precursors of supernova remnant shocks due to their self-generated magnetic fields. The cosmic-ray filamentation results in the growth of a long wavelength instability, and naturally couples the rapid non-linear amplification on small scales to larger length scales. Hybrid magnetohydrodynamics--particle simulations are performed to confirm the effect. The resulting large scale magnetic field may facilitate the scattering of high energy cosmic rays as required to accelerate protons beyond the knee in the cosmic-ray spectrum at supernova remnant shocks. Filamentation far upstream of the shock may also assist in the escape of cosmic rays from the accelerator.
We aim to test the plausibility of a theoretical framework in which the $\gamma-$ray emission detected from supernova remnants is of hadronic origin, i.e., due to the decay of neutral pions produced in nuclear collisions involving relativistic nuclei. In particular, we investigate how the nature of the circumstellar medium affects the evolution of a remnant and of its $\gamma-$ray emission, stressing the role of magnetic field amplification in the prediction of expected particle spectra. A phenomenological scenario consistent with both the underlying Physics and the larger and larger amount of observational data provided by the present generation of $\gamma-$ray experiments is finally outlined and critically discussed.
Recently, 60Fe was found in the Earth crust formed in a nearby recent supernova (SN). If the distance to the SN and mass of the progenitor of that SN was known, then one could constrain SN models. Knowing the positions, proper motions, and distances of dozens of young nearby neutron stars, we can determine their past flight paths and possible kinematic origin. Once the birth place of a neutron star in a SN is found, we would have determined the distance of the SN and the mass of the SN progenitor star.
We use observations of the continuum radio emission at 1420, 820, 408, 34.5 and 22 MHz to estimate the mean brightness temperatures of the HB 21 supernova remnant (SNR) at five frequencies. We also presented mean spectral index of HB 21. The spectra of HB 21 are estimated for mean temperatures versus frequency for 1420, 820, 408, 34.5 and 22 MHz. We also presented $T-T$ plots of three frequency pairs: between 1420--34.5, 1420--22, 34.5--22 MHz. We noticed flatter spectral indices at frequencies below 408 MHz. Probably this is due to the absorption by thermal plasma at low frequencies.
Supernova remnants (SNRs) are widely considered the most likely source of cosmic rays below the knee ($10^{15}$ eV). Studies of GeV and TeV gamma-ray emission in the vicinity of SNRs, in combination with multi-wavelength observations, can trace and constrain the nature of the charged particle population believed to be accelerated within SNR shocks. They may also speak to the diffusion and propagation of these energetic particles and to the nature of the acceleration mechanisms involved. We report here on recent observations of SNRs with VERITAS, including the discoveries of VHE gamma-ray emission from from G120.1+1.4 (Tycho's SNR) and from the northwest shell of G78.2+2.1 (gamma-ray source VER J2019+407, which was discovered as a consequence of the VERITAS Cygnus region survey).
The photometric properties of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) in the near-infrared as garnered from observations made over the last 30 years are reviewed. During this period, light curves for more than 120 nearby SNe Ia have been published, revealing considerable homogeneity but also some fascinating differences. These data have confirmed that, for all but the fastest declining objects, SNe Ia are essentially perfect standard candles in the near-infrared, displaying only a slight dependence of peak luminosity on decline rate and color.
The explosion of a core-collapse supernova can be approximated by the breakdown of steady-state solutions for accretion onto a proto-neutron star (PNS). We analytically show that as the neutrino luminosity exceeds a critical value L_c, the neutrinosphere pressure exceeds the hydrostatic limit even for an optimal shock radius R. This yields L_c \propto M^2 T^2 (with logarithmic corrections) and R \propto M/T, in agreement with numerical results, where M, T are the PNS mass, neutrino temperature. The near-critical flow can be approximated as a ballistic shell on top of an isothermal layer.
We present estimates of initial spin periods, $P_0$, for radio pulsars associated with supernova remnants. By using the published data on 30 objects, we were able to derive a reliable estimate for the initial spin period, assuming standard magneto-dipole spin-down (braking index n=3), in many cases. Our set of estimates is still not sufficient to infer the exact shape of the initial period distribution. However, we show that a gaussian distribution with mean and deviation $\sim 0.1$ s is consistent with our results, while flat, wide distributions and very narrow ones are disfavored.
We perform hydrodynamical simulations of core collapse supernovae (CCSNe) with a cylindrically-symmetrical numerical code (FLASH) to study the inflation of bubbles and the initiation of the explosion within the frame of the jittering-jets model. We study the typical time- scale of the model and compare it to the typical time-scale of the delayed neutrino mechanism. Our analysis shows that the explosion energy of the delayed neutrino mechanism is an order of magnitude less than the required 10^51 erg.
We briefly discuss the method of population synthesis to calculate theoretical delay time distributions of type Ia supernova progenitors. We also compare the results of the different research groups and conclude that although one of the main differences in the results for single degenerate progenitors is the retention efficiency with which accreted hydrogen is added to the white dwarf core, this cannot explain all the differences.
A review of neutrino astrophysics is presented, including solar and atmospheric neutrinos; neutrino mass and oscillations; the supernova mechanism, supernova neutrino production, and associated nucleosynthesis; cosmological neutrinos and Big Bang nucleosynthesis; neutrino cooling and associated limits on neutrino properties; and high-energy astrophysical neutrinos.
Galactic cosmic ray (CR) acceleration to the knee in the spectrum at a few PeV is only possible if the magnetic field ahead of a supernova remnant (SNR) shock is strongly amplified by CR escaping the SNR. A model formulated in terms of the electric charge carried by escaping CR predicts the maximum CR energy and the energy spectrum of CR released into the surrounding medium. We find that historical SNR such as Cas A, Tycho and Kepler may be expanding too slowly to accelerate CR to the knee at the present time.
In this Thesis I developed a one-dimensional Lagrangian hydrodynamic code with flux-limited radiation diffusion including gamma-ray transfer in gray approximation for any given distribution of 56Ni. The code was used to model bolometric light curves of Type II Plateau supernovae (SNe II-P). Using the models I performed a consistent comparison with our own large dataset of highly precise, well-sampled BVI light curves and spectra of SNe II-P. I studied observational and physical properties of our set of SNe II-P and I analyzed the correlations between different observed and physical parameters with the aim of characterizing the explosion and progenitor properties of such events.
Three lines of evidence indicate that in the most common type of core collapse supernovae, the energy deposited in the ejecta by the exploding core is approximately proportional to the progenitor mass cubed. This results stems from an observed uniformity of light curve plateau duration, a correlation between mass and ejecta velocity, and the known correlation between luminosity and velocity. This result ties in analytical and numerical models together with observations, providing us with clues as to the mechanism via which the explosion of the core deposits a small fraction of its energy into the hurled envelope.
Cosmological distances inferred from supernova Ia observations constitute the most direct and solid evidence for the recently detected accelerated expansion of the universe. In this contribution, we show some inconsistencies between two of the main light-curve fitters used for the elaboration of supernova Ia data sets, opening new observational challenges regarding the use of these luminosity distances when combined with CMB and BAO data. We also mention ongoing analysis related to alternative models. The resolution of these challenges will be crucial for XXI century cosmology.
About 30 Galactic supernova remnants (SNRs) are thought to be physically associated with molecular clouds (MCs). These systems are prime \g-ray source candidates as the accelerated particles from shock fronts collide with the surrounding high-density medium thus emitting gamma-rays through hadronic interactions. However only a handful of such interacting SNRs are detected at TeV energies. We report the current status of the High Energy Stereoscopic System (H.E.S.S.) observations towards these SNR-MC systems, with a particular emphasis on the latest results.
It is not straightforward to determine the distribution of supernova remnants (SNRs) in the Galaxy. The two main difficulties are that there are observational selection effects that mean that catalogues of SNRs are incomplete, and distances are not available for most remnants. Here I discuss the selection effects that apply to the latest catalogue of Galactic SNRs. I then compare the observed distribution of `bright' SNRs in Galactic longitude with that expected from models in order to constrain the Galactic distribution of SNRs.
Observational data for type Ia supernovae, shows that the expansion of the universe is accelerated. This accelerated expansion can be described by a cosmological constant or by dark energy models like quintessence. An interesting question may be raised here. Is it possible to describe the accelerated expansion of universe using varying--$G$ cosmological models? Here we shall show that the price for having accelerated expansion in slow--varying--$G$ models (in which the dynamical terms of $G$ are ignored) is to have highly non--conserved matter and also that it is in contradiction with other data.
Theories with dark forces and dark sectors are of interest for dark matter models. In this paper we find the region in parameter space that is constrained by supernova cooling constraints when the models include dark sector particles with masses around 100 MeV or less. We include only interactions with electrons and positrons. The constraint is important for small mixing parameters.
Super-luminous supernovae that radiate more than 10^44 ergs per second at their peak luminosity have recently been discovered in faint galaxies at redshifts of 0.1-4. Some evolve slowly, resembling models of 'pair-instability' supernovae. Such models involve stars with original masses 140-260 times that of the Sun that now have carbon-oxygen cores of 65-30 solar masses. In these stars, the photons that prevent gravitational collapse are converted to electron-positron pairs, causing rapid contraction and thermonuclear explosions. Many solar masses of 56Ni are synthesized; this isotope decays to 56Fe via 56Co, powering bright light curves. Such massive progenitors are expected to have formed from metal-poor gas in the early Universe. Recently, supernova 2007bi in a galaxy at redshift 0.127 (about 12 billion years after the Big Bang) with a metallicity one-third that of the Sun was observed to look like a fading pair-instability supernova. Here we report observations of two slow-to-fade super-luminous supernovae that show relatively fast rise times and blue colours, which are incompatible with pair-instability models. Their late-time light-curve and spectral similarities to supernova 2007bi call the nature of that event into question. Our early spectra closely resemble typical fast-declining super-luminous supernovae, which are not powered by radioactivity. Modelling our observations with 10-16 solar masses of magnetar-energized ejecta demonstrates the possibility of a common explosion mechanism. The lack of unambiguous nearby pair-instability events suggests that their local rate of occurrence is less than 6x10^-6 times that of the core-collapse rate.
We report on observations of the supernova remnant Cassiopeia A in the energy range from 100 MeV to 100 GeV using 44 months of observations from the Large Area Telescope on board the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope. We perform a detailed spectral analysis of this source and report on a low-energy break in the spectrum at $1.72^{+1.35}_{-0.89}$ GeV. By comparing the results with models for the gamma-ray emission, we find that hadronic emission is preferred for the GeV energy range.
We present a new formula which models the rate of decline of supernovae (SN) as given by the light curve in various bands. The physical basis is the conversion of the flux of kinetic energy into radiation. The two main components of the model are a power law dependence for the radius--time relation and a decreasing density with increasing distance from the central point. The new formula is applied to SN 1993J, SN 2005cf, SN 1999ac, and SN 2001el in different bands.
We determine the oxygen density in the central zone of nine type IIP supernovae (SN~IIP) at the nebular stage using oxygen doublet [O I] 6300, 6364 \AA. Combined with two available estimates these data indicate that oxygen densities on day 300 are distributed in rather narrow range $(2.3\pm1)\times10^9$ cm$^{-3}$. The result does not depend on the distance, extinction, or model assumptions. We demonstrate that the found density distribution suggests that the explosion energy of SN~IIP increases with the stellar mass.
We present UBVRI photometry of the supernova 2014J in M82, obtained in the period from January 24 until March 3, 2014, as well as two spectra, taken on February 4 and March 5. We derive dates and magnitudes of maximum light in the UBVRI bands, the light curve parameters Delta m(15) and expansion velocities of the prominent absorption lines. We discuss colour evolution, extinction and maximum luminosity of SN 2014J.
We present a library of numerical models of cosmic-ray accelerating supernova remnants (SNRs) evolving through a homogeneous ambient medium. We analyse distributions of the different energy components and diffusive shock acceleration time-scales for the models in various conditions. The library comprises a variety of SNR evolutionary scenarios and is used to map remnants with sufficiently known properties. This mapping constrains the respective ambient medium properties and the acceleration efficiency. Employing the library, we derive the ambient medium density, ambient magnetic field strength and the cosmic-ray acceleration efficiency for models of Tycho and SN 1006 remnants and refine the ages of SNR 0509-67.5 and SNR 0519-69.0.
It is now common practice to constrain cosmological parameters using supernovae (SNe) catalogues constructed from several different surveys. Before performing such a joint analysis, however, one should check that parameter constraints derived from the individual SNe surveys that make up the catalogue are mutually consistent. We describe a statistically-robust mutual consistency test, which we calibrate using simulations, and apply it to each pairwise combination of the surveys making up, respectively, the UNION2 catalogue and the very recent JLA compilation by Betoule et al. We find no inconsistencies in the latter case, but conclusive evidence for inconsistency between some survey pairs in the UNION2 catalogue.
We demonstrate a multipole expansion method to calculate collective neutrino oscillations in supernovae using the neutrino bulb model. We show that it is much more efficient to solve multi-angle neutrino oscillations in multipole basis than in angle basis. The multipole expansion method also provides interesting insights into multi-angle calculations that were accomplished previously in angle basis.
We review recent progress in the theoretical predictions of gravitational waves (GWs) of core-collapse supernovae. Following a brief summary of the methods in the numerical modeling, we summarize multiple physical elements that determine the GW signatures which have been considered to be important in extracting the information of the long-veiled explosion mechanism from the observation of the GWs. We conclude with a summary of the most urgent tasks to make the dream come true.
The surface brightness diameter relationship for supernovae remnants (SNRs) is explained by adopting a model of direct conversion of the flux of kinetic energy into synchrotron luminosity. Two laws of motion are adopted, a power law model for the radius-time relationship, and a model which uses the thin layer approximation. The fluctuations on the log-log surface diameter relationship are modeled by a Monte Carlo simulation. In this model a new probability density function for the density as function of the galactic height is introduced.
It has been theoretically predicted many decades ago that extremely massive stars that develop large oxygen cores will become dynamically unstable, due to electron-positron pair production. The collapse of such oxygen cores leads to powerful thermonuclear explosions that unbind the star and can produce, in some cases, many solar masses of radioactive 56Ni. For many years, no examples of this process were observed in nature. Here, I briefly review recent observations of luminous supernovae that likely result from pair-instability explosions, in the nearby and distant Universe.
Variable NaI absorption lines have been reported in a number of type Ia supernovae (SNeIa). The presence of this circumstellar material suggests that cataclysmic variables (CVs) with a giant donor star may be the progenitors of these SNeIa (Patat et al. 2007). We present echelle spectra of the CV QU Carinae which strengthen the connection between CVs of the V Sge class, the Accretion Wind Evolution scenario, variable wind features, variable NaI absorption, and SNIa. This thread not only provides insight into the spectral peculiarities of QU Car, but also links SNeIa as a class with their parent systems.
The connection between long GRBs and supernovae is now well established. I briefly review the evidence in favor of this connection and summarise where we are observationally. I also use a few events to exemplify what should be done and what type of data are needed. I also look at what we can learn from looking at SNe not associated with GRBs and see how GRBs fit into the broad picture of stellar explosions.
We use the $\Delta_{\chi^2}$ statistic introduced in \cite{gup08,gup10} to study directional dependence, in the high-z supernovae data. This dependence could arise due to departures from the cosmological principle or from direction dependent statistical systematics in the data. We apply our statistic to the gold data set from \cite{rie04} and \cite{rie07}, and Union2 catalogue from \cite{aman10}. Our results show that all the three data sets show a weak but consistent direction dependence. In 2007 data errors are Gaussian, however other two data sets show non-Gaussian features.
Scalar (fermion) dark matter with mass in the MeV range coupled to ordinary neutrinos and another fermion (scalar) is motivated by scenarios that establish a link between radiatively generated neutrino masses and the dark matter relic density. With such a coupling, cosmic supernova neutrinos, on their way to us, could resonantly interact with the background dark matter particles, giving rise to a dip in their redshift-integrated spectra. Current and future neutrino detectors, such as Super-Kamiokande, LENA and Hyper-Kamiokande, could be able to detect this distortion.
We briefly review the contribution of SN rate measurements to the debate on SN progenitor scenarios. We find that core collapse rates confirms the rapid evolution of the star formation rate with redshift. After accounting for the dispersion of SN Ia measurements and uncertainty of the star formation history, the standard scenarios for SN Ia progenitors appear consistent with all observational constraints.
The observations of supernova 1987A in underground detectors are revisited. It is shown that, while the LSD detector in the Mont Blanc Laboratory observed only one burst at 2h 52min 36.8sec U.T., the Kamiokande data show a possible second burst, in addition to the well known one at 7h 35min 33.7sec U.T. This second burst consists of a cluster of seven pulses, well above the energy threshold of the detector, observed during 6.2 seconds starting at 7h 54min 22.2sec U.T. Do these observations imply a long duration of the collapse?
Kepler's supernova, discovered in October 1604, produced a remnant that has been well studied observationally in the radio, infrared, optical, and X-ray bands, and theoretically. Some models have predicted a TeV gamma-ray flux that is detectable with current Imaging Cherenkov Atmospheric Telescopes. We report on observations carried out in 2005 April with the CANGAROO-III telescope. No statistically significant excess was observed, and limitations on the allowed parameter range in the model are discussed.
We investigate the equation of state w(z) in a non-parametric form using the latest compilations of distance luminosity from SNe Ia at high z. We combine the inverse problem approach with a Monte Carlo to scan the space of priors. On the light of these high redshift supernova data sets, we reconstruct w(z). A comparison between a sample including the latest results at z>1 and a sample without those results show the improvement achieved by observations of very high z supernovae. We present the prospects to measure the variation of dark energy density along z by this method.
Oscillations of neutrino emerging from a supernova core are studied. In this extremely high density region neutrino self interactions induce collective flavor transitions. When collective transitions are decoupled from matter oscillations, as for our chosen matter profile, an analytical interpretation of the collective effects is possible, by means of a mechanical analogy with a spherical pendulum. For inverted neutrino hierarchy the neutrino propagation can be divided in three regimes: synchronization, bipolar oscillations, and spectral split. Our simulation shows that averaging over neutrino trajectories does not alter the nature of these three regimes.
We study the stochastic electron acceleration by fast mode waves in the turbulent downstream of weakly magnetized collisionless astrophysical shocks. The acceleration is most efficient in a dissipative layer, and the model characteristics are determined by the shock speed, density, magnetic field, and turbulence decay length. The model explains observations of shell-type supernova remnants RX J1713.7-3946 and J0852.0-4622 and can be tested by observations in hard X-rays with the HXMT and NuSTAR or gamma-rays with the GLAST.
The effect of the QCD phase transition is studied for the mass-radius relation of compact stars and for hot and dense matter at a given proton fraction used as input in core-collapse supernova simulations. The phase transitions to the 2SC and CFL color superconducting phases lead to stable hybrid star configurations with a pure quark matter core. In supernova explosions quark matter could be easily produced due to $\beta$-equilibrium, small proton fractions and nonvanishing temperatures. A low critical density for the phase transition to quark matter is compatible with present pulsar mass measurements.
Neutrinos emitted from a core-collapse supernova can experience collective flavor transformation because of high neutrino fluxes. As a result, neutrinos of different flavors can have their energy spectra (partially) swapped, a phenomenon known as the (stepwise) spectral swapping or spectral split. We give a brief review of a simple model that explains this phenomenon.
We derive the event-by-event likelihood that allows to extract the complete information contained in the energy, time and direction of supernova neutrinos, and specify it in the case of SN1987A data. We resolve discrepancies in the previous literature, numerically relevant already in the concrete case of SN1987A data.
We present BVRI photometry of supernova 2011fe in M101 from 2.9 to 182 days after the explosion. The light curves and color evolution show that SN 2011fe belongs to the "normal" subset of type Ia supernovae, with $\Delta m_{15}(B) = 1.21 \pm 0.03$ mag. After correcting for extinction and adopting a distance modulus of $(m - M) = 29.10$ mag to M101, we derive absolute magnitudes $M_B = -19.21$, $M_V = -19.19$, $M_R = -19.18$ and $M_I = -18.94$. We compare visual measurements of this event to our CCD photometry and find evidence for a systematic difference based on color.
We argue that the cosmic ray positron excess observed in ATIC-2, Fermi LAT, PAMELA, HESS and recently in the precision AMS-02 experiment can be attributed to the production in a local, middle-aged supernova remnant (SNR). Using the prediction of our model of cosmic ray acceleration in SNR we estimate that the SNR responsible for the observed positron excess is located between 250 and 320pc from the Sun and is 170-380 kyear old. The most probable candidate for such a source is the SNR which gave birth to the well-known Geminga pulsar, but is no longer visible. Other contenders are also discussed.
The equipartition or minimum-energy calculation is a well-known procedure for estimating magnetic field strength and total energy in the magnetic field and cosmic ray particles by using only the radio synchrotron emission. In one of our previous papers we have offered a modified equipartition calculation for supernova remnants (SNRs) with spectral indices 0.5<\alpha <1. Here we extend the analysis to SNRs with \alpha =0.5 and \alpha =1.
Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs) are found at much higher redshifts (z>6) than Supernova Ia (z~1), and hence, they can be used to probe very primitive universe. However, radiation mechanism of GRB remains a puzzle, unlike Supernova Ia. Through comprehensive description, both empirical and physical, we shall discuss the most likely way to use the constituent pulses of a GRB to find the radiation mechanism as well as using the pulses as luminosity indicators.
We consider dust formation during the ejection of the hydrogen envelope of a red supergiant during a failed supernova (SN) creating a black hole. While the dense, slow moving ejecta are very efficient at forming dust, only the very last phases of the predicted visual transient will be obscured. The net grain production consists of ~0.01 solar masses of very large grains (10 to 1000 microns). This means that failed SNe could be the source of the very large extrasolar dust grains identified by Ulysses, Galileo and radar studies of meteoroid re-entry trails rather than their coming from an ejection process associated with protoplanetary or other disks.
Different pieces of observational evidence suggest the existence of disks around isolated neutron stars. Such disks could be formed from supernova fallback when neutron stars are born in core-collapse supernova explosions. Efforts have been made to search for disks around different classes of pulsars, which include millisecond pulsars, young neutron star classes (magnetars, central compact objects, and X-ray dim isolated neutron stars), and regular radio pulsars. We review the main results from observations at wavelengths of from optical to sub-millimeter/millimeter.
Effective values for the key helium burning reaction rates, triple-alpha and 12C(alpha,gamma)16O, are obtained by adjusting their strengths so as to obtain the best match with the solar abundance pattern of isotopes uniquely or predominately made in core collapse supernovae. These effective rates are then used to determine the production of the neutrino isotopes. The use of effective rates considerably reduces the uncertainties in the production factors arising from uncertainties in the helium burning rates, and improves our ability to use the production of 11B to constrain the neutrino emission from supernovae.
RXJ1713.7-3946 is a key object to check the supernova remnant paradigm of the origin of Galactic cosmic rays. While the origin of its gamma-ray emission (hadronic versus leptonic) is still debated, the hard spectrum at GeV energies reported by the Fermi collaboration is generally interpreted as a strong argument in favor of a leptonic scenario. On the contrary, we show that hadronic interactions can naturally explain the gamma-ray spectrum if gas clumps are present in the supernova remnant shell. The absence of thermal X-rays from the remnant fits well within this scenario.
A general scheme of the excluded-volume approximation as applied to multicomponent systems with an arbitrary degree of degeneracy has been developed. This scheme also admits an allowance for additional interactions between the components of a system. A specific form of the excluded-volume approximation for investigating supernova matter at subnuclear densities has been found from comparison with the hard-sphere model. The possibility of describing the phase transition to uniform nuclear matter in terms of the formalism under consideration is discussed.
The pasta phase in core-collapse supernova matter (finite temperatures and fixed proton fractions) is studied within relativistic mean field models. Two different calculations are used for comparison, the Thomas-Fermi (TF) and the Coexisting Phases (CP) approximations. The effects of including light clusters in nuclear matter and the densities at which the transitions between pasta configurations and to uniform matter occur are also investigated. Finally, a comparison with a finite temperature Skyrme-Hartree-Fock calculation is drawn.
The birth kicks of black holes, arising from asymmetric mass ejection or neutrino emission during core-collapse supernovae, are of great interest for both observationally constraining supernova models and population-synthesis studies of binary evolution. Recently, several efforts were undertaken to estimate black hole birth kicks from observations of black-hole low-mass X-ray binaries. We follow up on this work, specifically focussing on the highest estimated black-hole kick velocities. We find that existing observations do not require black hole birth kicks in excess of approximately 100 km/s, although higher kicks are not ruled out.
It is now firmly established that at a significant fraction of hydrogen-rich type II supernovae (SNe II) arise from red supergiant progenitors. However, a large diversity of SN properties exist, and it is presently unclear how this can be understood in terms of progenitor differences and pre-SN stellar evolution. In this contribution, I present the diversity of SN II V-band light-curves for a large sample of SNe II, and compare these to photometry of SNe II which have progenitor mass constraints from pre-explosion imaging.
A possibility is explored to account for the light curve and the low expansion velocity of the supernova SN~2011ht, a member of group of three objects showing signatures of both IIn and IIP supernovae. It is argued that the radiated energy and the expansion velocity are consistent with the low energy explosion ($\approx6\times10^{49}$ erg) and $\leq 2 M_{\odot}$ ejecta interacting with the circumstellar envelope of $6-8 M_{\odot}$ and the radius of $~2\times10^{14}$ cm. The test of this scenario is proposed.
The evolution of close-orbit progenitor binaries of double neutron star (DNS) systems leads to supernova (SN) explosions of ultra-stripped stars. The amount of SN ejecta mass is very limited from such, more or less, naked metal cores with envelope masses of only 0.01-0.2 Msun. The combination of little SN ejecta mass and the associated possibility of small NS kicks is quite important for the characteristics of the resulting DNS systems left behind. Here, we discuss theoretical predictions for DNS systems, based on Case BB Roche-lobe overflow prior to ultra-stripped SNe, and briefly compare with observations.
Giant eruptions or supernova-impostor events are far more mysterious than true supernovae. An extreme example can release as much radiative energy as a SN, ejecting several M_sun of material. These events involve continuous radiation-driven outflows rather than blast waves. They constitute one of the main unsolved problems in stellar astrophysics, but have received surprisingly little theoretical effort. Here I note some aspects that are not yet familiar to most astronomers.
We combine the thermal QRPA approach with the Skyrme energy density functional theory (Skyrme-TQRPA) for modelling the process of electron capture on nuclei in supernova environment. For a sample nucleus, $^{56}$Fe, the Skyrme-TQRPA approach is applied to analyze thermal effects on the strength function of GT$_+$ transitions which dominate electron capture at $E_e\le 30$~MeV. Several Skyrme interactions are used in order to verify the sensitivity of the obtained results to the Skyrme force parameters. Finite-temperature cross sections are calculated and the results are compared with those of the other model calculations.
Mass loss bridges the gap between massive stars and supernovae (SNe) in two major ways: (i) theoretically it is the amount of mass lost that determines the mass of the star prior to explosion, and (ii) observations of the circumstellar material around SNe may teach us the type of progenitor that made the SN. Here, I present the latest models and observations of mass loss from massive stars, both for canonical massive O stars, as well as very massive stars (VMS) that show Wolf-Rayet type features.
Modern numerical simulations of the formation of the first stars predict that the first stars formed in multiples. In those cases, the chemical yields of multiple supernova explosions may have contributed to the formation of a next generation star. We match the chemical abundances of the oldest observed stars in the universe to a database of theoretical supernova models, to show that it is likely that the first stars formed from the ashes of two or more progenitors.
The role of the non-resonant firehose instability in conditions relevant to the precursors of supernova remnant shocks is considered. Using a second order tensor expansion of the Vlasov-Fokker-Planck equation we illustrate the necessary conditions for the firehose to operate. It is found that for very fast shocks, the diffusion approximation predicts that the linear firehose growth rate is marginally faster than its resonant counterpart. Preliminary hybrid MHD-Vlasov-Fokker-Planck simulation results using young supernova relevant parameters are presented.
A revised catalogue of 294 Galactic supernova remnants (SNRs) is presented, along with some simple statistics. This catalogue has twenty more entries than did the previous version (from 2009), as 21 new remnants have been added, and one object has been removed as it has been identified as an HII region.
Protomagnetars spun up to millisecond rotation periods by supernova fallback are predicted to radiate gravitational waves via hydrodynamic instabilities for ~ 10^2 s before possibly collapsing to form a black hole. It is shown that magnetic funnelling of the accretion flow (i) creates a magnetically confined polar mountain, which boosts the gravitational wave signal, and (ii) "buries" the magnetic dipole moment, delaying the propeller phase and assisting black hole formation.
We examine the variable Chaplygin gas (VCG) model with the aim of establishing tight constraints by using type-Ia supernovae, lookback time measurements, Baryon Acoustic Oscillations (BAO) and the Gamma Ray Bursts. We report the parameter constraints obtained via statistical analysis of cosmic observables namely, luminosity distance, BAO distance and lookback time measurement
We extend the self-similar solution derived by Chevalier for a Sedov blast wave accelerating cosmic rays (CR) to show that the Galactic CR population can be divided into: (A) CR with energies above ~200GeV released upstream during CR acceleration by supernova remnants (SNR), (B) CR advected into the interior of the SNR during expansion and then released from the SNR at the end of its life to provide the Galactic CR component below ~200GeV. The intersection between the two populations may correspond to a measured change in the Galactic CR spectral index at this energy.
We present CCD BVRI photometry for PSN J07285387+3349106 in NGC 2388 collected from 2015 February 17 until March 17. Decaying by 3.6 mag in the R band in the first 20 days post-maximum, this object is among the fastest supernovae observed to date. The peak absolute R magnitude exceeds -18.7 and may be as high as -20.1.
Sterile neutrinos of keV masses are one of the most promising candidates for the warm dark matter, which could solve the small-scale problems encountered in the scenario of cold dark matter. We present a detailed study of the production of such sterile neutrinos in a supernova core, and derive stringent bounds on the active-sterile neutrino mixing angles and sterile neutrino masses based on the standard energy-loss argument.
An intrinsic time of homogeneous models is global. The Friedmann equation by its sense ties time intervals. Exact solutions of the Friedmann equation in Standard cosmology and Conformal cosmology are presented. Theoretical curves interpolated the Hubble diagram on latest supernovae are expressed in analytical form. The class of functions in which the concordance model is described is Weierstrass meromorphic functions. The Standard cosmological model and Conformal one fit the modern Hubble diagram equivalently. However, the physical interpretation of the modern data from concepts of the Conformal cosmology is simpler, so is preferable.
The middle-aged supernova remnant IC 443 is interacting with molecular gas in its surroundings. $Fermi$-LAT has established that its gamma-ray emission at low energies shows the "pion bump" that is characteristic of hadronic emission. TeV emission was previously established by MAGIC and VERITAS at a site of interaction between the shock front and a molecular cloud. VERITAS has continued to observe IC 443 and can now resolve the emission on few-arcmin scales. We will present results on the emission morphology and discuss possible sources of the emission, including the shell of the remnant and other gaseous structures in the vicinity.
Massive stars unable to sustain gravitational collapse, at the end of nuclear burning stage, turns out into core-collapse supernovae, leaving behind compact objects like neutron stars or black holes. The progenitor properties like mass and metallicity primarily governs the explosion parameters and type of compact remnant. In this contribution we summarize observational study of three Core Collapse type IIP SNe 2012aw, 2013ab and 2013ej, which are rigorously observed from ARIES and other Indian observatories and discuss their progenitor and explosion properties.
In this paper we derive three equations of motion for a supernova remnant (SNR) in the framework of the thin layer approximation using the Pad\'e approximant. The circumstellar medium is assumed to follow a density profile of either an exponential type, a Gaussian type, or a Lane--Emden ($n=5$) type. The three equations of motion are applied to four SNRs: Tycho, Cas A, Cygnus loop, and SN~1006. The percentage error of the Pad\'e approximated solution is always less than $10\%$. The theoretical decrease of the velocity over ten years for SNRs is evaluated.
We perform calculations of white dwarfs endowed with strong magnetic fields. White dwarfs are the progenitors of supernova Type Ia explosions and they are widely used as candles to show that the Universe is expanding and accelerating. However, observations of ultraluminous supernovae have suggested that the progenitor of such an explosion should be a white dwarf with mass above the well-known Chandrasekhar limit $\sim \,$1.4 $\rm{M_{\odot}}$. In corroboration with other works, but by using a fully general relativistic framework, we obtained also strongly magnetized white dwarfs with masses $\rm{M \sim 2.0\,\, M_{\odot}}$.
We determine limits from SN 1987A on massive axion-like particles (ALPs) with masses in the 10 keV - 100 MeV range and purely coupled to two photons. ALPs produced in the core collapse escape from the star and decay into photons that can be observed as a delayed and diffuse burst. We discuss the time and angular distribution of such a signal. Looking into the future we also estimate the possible improvements if the red supergiant Betelgeuse explodes in a supernova event.
In this paper we present the most up-to-date list of nearby galaxies with optically detected supernova remnants (SNRs). We discuss the contribution of the H{\alpha} flux from the SNRs to the total H{\alpha} flux and its influence on derived star formation rate (SFR) for 18 galaxies in our sample. We found that the contribution of SNRs' flux to the total H{\alpha} flux is 5 $\pm$ 5 per cent. Due to the observational selection effects, the SNRs contamination of SFRs derived herein represents only a lower limit.
This paper examines neutrino flavor evolution outside a supernova neutrinosphere using a one-dimensional model that retains the non-linear nature of neutrino-neutrino interactions as well as some aspects of the full geometry. In some limiting cases analytic results can be obtained that display different behavior from their counterparts in (linear) solar neutrino flavor evolution. For more general cases, numerical solutions require extended numerical algorithms to achieve stable solutions, and these solutions exhibit standard chaotic behavior.
In this work we present the preliminary results of a complete equation of state (EoS) for core-collapse supernova simulations. We treat uniform matter made of nucleons using the the quark-meson coupling (QMC) model. We show a table with a variety of thermodynamic quantities, which covers the proton fraction range $Y_{p}=0-0.65$ with the linear grid spacing $ \Delta Y_{p}=0.01$ ($66$ points) and the density range $\rho_{B}=10^{14}-10^{16}$g.cm$^{-3}$ with the logarithmic grid spacing $\Delta log_{10}(\rho_{B}/[$g.cm$^{-3}])=0.1 $ ($21$ points). This preliminary study is performed at zero temperature and our results are compared with the widely used EoS already available in the literature.
The Bianchi I metric describes a homogeneous, but anisotropic universe and is commonly used to fit cosmological data. A fit to the angular distribution of 740 supernovae of type Ia with measured redshift and apparent luminosity is presented. It contains an intriguing, yet non-significant signal of a preferred direction in the sky. The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope being built in Chile should measure some 500 000 supernovae within the next 20 years and verify or falsify this signal.
We present initial results of an ongoing study of the supernova remnants (SNRs) and candidates in the Magellanic Clouds. Some 108 objects in both Clouds are considered to be either an SNR or a reliable candidate. This represents the most complete sample of known SNRs in any galaxy. therefore, this study allows us to study SNR population properties such as the size and spectral index distribution. Here, we also show 12 known Large Magellanic Cloud SNRs from type Ia SN explosions and briefly comment on their importance.
The Cygnus Loop is a well-studied supernova remnant (SNR) that has been observed across the electromagnetic spectrum. Although widely believed to be an SNR shell with a blow- out region in the south, we consider the possibility that this object is two SNRs projected along the same line-of-sight by using multi-wavelength images and modelling. Our results show that a model of two objects including some overlap region/interaction between the two objects has the best match to the observed data.
Recent measurements of cosmic-ray light nuclei by AMS-02 have shown that there is an unexpected component of cosmic-ray (CR) lithium whose spectral index is harder than that expected from the secondary production scenario. We propose the nearby Type Ia supernova following a nova eruption as the origin of lithium nuclei in the CRs. By fitting the data of CR protons, helium, and lithium fluxes provided by AMS-02 with our theoretical model we show that this scenario is consistent with the observations. The observational tests that can check our hypothesis are briefly discussed.
One of the unresolved questions currently in cosmology is that of the non-linear accelerated expansion of the universe. This has been attributed to the so called Dark Energy (DE). The accelerated expansion of the universe is deduced from measurements of Type Ia supernovae. Here we propose alternate models to account for the Type Ia supernovae measurements without invoking dark energy.
Convective perturbations arising from nuclear shell burning can play an important role in propelling neutrino-driven core-collapse supernova explosions. In this work, we analyze the impact of vorticity waves on the shock dynamics and the post-shock flow using the solution of the linear hydrodynamics equations. We show that the entropy perturbations generated by the interaction of the shock with vorticity waves may play a dominant role in generating buoyancy-driven turbulence in the gain region. We estimate that the resulting reduction in the critical luminosity is 17-24%, which approximately agrees with the results of three-dimensional neutrino-hydrodynamics simulations.
In this study we include axions in stellar evolution models adopting the current stringest constraints for their coupling to photons and electrons. We obtain that the minimum stellar mass of Core Collapse Supernova (CCSN) progenitors is shifted up by nearly 2 Mo. This result seems to be in tension with the observationaly derived minimum mass of CCSN progenitors.
Accurate distances to supernova remnants (SNRs) are crucial in determining their size, age, luminosity and evolutionary state. To determine distances, we chose three SNRs from the VLA Galactic Plane Survey (VGPS) for extraction of HI absorption spectra. Analysing HI absorption spectra, $^{13}$CO emission spectra, and HI and $^{13}$CO channel maps, kinematic velocities (or their limits) to the three SNRs were calculated. The three SNRs are probably associated with molecular clouds and the new distance to G$20.4+0.1$, G$24.7-0.6$ and G$28.6-0.1$ are $7.8 \pm0.5$ kpc, $3.8\pm 0.2 $ kpc and $ 9.6 \pm 0.3 $ kpc, respectively.
We present a summary of our understanding of Type Ia Supernova progenitors, mostly discussing the observational approach. The main goal of this review is to provide the non-specialist with a sufficiently comprehensive view of where we stand.
Resonant interactions between neutrinos from a Galactic supernova and dark matter particles can lead to a sharp dip in the neutrino energy spectrum. Due to its excellent energy resolution, measurement of this effect with the JUNO experiment can provide evidence for such couplings. We discuss how JUNO may confirm or further constrain a model where scalar dark matter couples to active neutrinos and another fermion.
The well-sampled afterglows of gamma ray bursts (GRBs) not associated with a supernova (SN) explosion, can be scaled down to a simple dimensionless universal formula, which describes well their temporal behavior. Such SN-less GRBs include short hard bursts (SHBs) and long SN-less GRBs. The universal temporal behavior of their afterglows is that expected from a pulsar wind nebula powered by the rotational energy loss of the newly born pulsar.
In this Research Note we present a serendipitous discovery of the transient CGS2004A (AT2004iu) in an image collected by the Carnegie-Irvine Galaxy Survey of the Scd: galaxy NGC 1892, which we determine is most likely to have been a type IIP supernova.
MASTER OT J033744.97+723159.0/SN 2017gpn was discovered in the error-box of LIGO/Virgo G299232 gravitational wave alert. The spectrum of SN 2017gpn is consistent with a Type IIb supernova. In this work we present the photometry of 20 epochs of observations performed with CCD-photometer on the Zeiss-1000 telescope. The light curves in B and Rc filters were obtained. The multicolour light curves were also modelled numerically using the one-dimensional radiation hydro-dynamical code STELLA.
We model the circumstellar medium with four density profiles: hyperbolic type, power law type, exponential type and Gaussian type. We solve analytically or numerically the four first-order differential equations which arise in the framework of the classical thin layer approximation. The non-cubic dependence of the swept mass with the advancing radius is also considered. We derive the equation of motion for the thin layer approximation in special relativity in two cases. The initial conditions are chosen in order to model the temporal evolution of SN 1987A over 23 years and of SN 1006 over 1000 years. We review the building blocks of the symmetrical and asymmetrical formations of the image.
This is a white paper submitted in response to the call from the Astro2020 Decadal Survey Committee. We outline the scientific progress that will be made in the next few decades in the study of supernova remnants in the X-ray band, using observatories like Athena, Lynx, and AXIS.
Using a semi-analytic model of non-linear diffusive shock acceleration, we model the spectrum of cosmic ray (CR) electrons accelerated by supernova remnants (SNRs). Because electrons experience synchrotron losses in the amplified magnetic fields characteristic of SNRs, they exhibit substantially steeper spectra than protons. In particular, we find that the difference between the electron and proton spectral index (power law slope) ranges from 0.1 to 0.4. Our findings must be reckoned with theories of Galactic CR transport, which often assume that electrons and protons are injected with the same slope, and may especially have implications for the observed "positron excess."
A revised catalogue of Galactic supernova remnants (SNRs) is presented, along with some simple statistics of their properties. Six new SNRs have been added to the catalogue since the previous published version from 2014, and six entries have been removed, as they have been identified as HII regions, leaving the number of entries in the catalogue at 294. Some simple statistics of the remnants in the catalogue, and the selection effects that apply, are discussed, along with some recently proposed Galactic SNR candidates.
The constraints on non-minimal dark sectors involving ensembles of unstable dark-matter species are well established and quite stringent in cases in which these species decay to visible-sector particles. However, in cases in which these ensembles decay exclusively to other, lighter dark-sector states, the corresponding constraints are less well established. In this paper, we investigate how information about the expansion rate of the universe at low redshifts gleaned from observations of Type Ia supernovae can be used to constrain ensembles of unstable particles which decay primarily into dark radiation.
Observational data from the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope are analyzed with a goal in mind to look for variations in gamma-ray flux from young shell-like supernova remnants. Uniform methodological approach is adopted for all SNRs considered. G1.9+0.3 and Kepler SNRs are not detected. The light curves of Cas~A and Tycho SNRs are compatible with the steady GeV flux during the recent ten years, as also X-ray and radio fluxes. Less confident results on SN1006 and SN1987A are discussed.
(The discussion is expanded, and a mistake in the crossing probability is corrected.)
Using recently calculated yields for Type II supernovae, along with models for chemical evolution and the distribution of mass in the interstellar medium, the current abundances and spatial distributions of two key gamma-ray radioactivities, $^{26}$Al and $^{60}$Fe, are determined. The estimated steady state production rates are 2.0 $\pm$ 1.0 M\sun \ Myr$^{-1}$ for $^{26}$Al and 0.75 $\pm$ 0.4 M\sun \ Myr$^{-1}$ for $^{60}$Fe. This corresponds to 2.2 $\pm$ 1.1 M\sun \ of $^{26}$Al and 1.7 $\pm$ 0.9 M\sun \ of $^{60}$Fe in the present interstellar medium. Sources of uncertainty are discussed, one of the more important being the current rate of core collapse supernovae in the Galaxy. Our simple model gives three per century, but reasonable changes in the star formation rate could easily accommodate a core collapse rate one-half as large, and thus one-half the yields. When these stellar and chemical evolution results are mapped into a three dimensional model of the Galaxy, the calculated 1809 keV gamma-ray flux map is consistent with the {\it Compton Gamma Ray Observatory} observations of a steep decline in the flux outside a longitude of $\pm$ 50$^\circ$ from the Galactic center, and the slight flux enhancements observed in the vicinity of spiral arms. Other potential stellar sources of $^{26}$Al and $^{60}$Fe are mentioned, especially the possibility of $^{60}$Fe synthesis in Type Ia supernovae. Predictions for the $^{60}$Fe mass distribution, total mass, and flux map are given.
Turbulent combustion is three-dimensional. Turbulence in a Type Ia supernova is driven on large scales by the buoyancy of burning products. The turbulent cascade penetrates down to very small scales, and makes the rate of deflagration independent of the microphysics. The competition between the turbulent cascade and the freeze-out of turbulent motions due to stellar expansion determines the largest scale participating in the cascade. This sets the bulk rate of a deflagration in a supernova. The freeze-out limits the bulk rate of deflagration to a value that makes a powerful explosion impossible. Two-dimensional simulations cannot capture these essential elements of turbulent combustion, even in principle. A powerful delayed detonation explosion can take place if the burning makes a transition to a detonation. A deflagration to detonation transition (DDT) can occur in a layer of mixed cold fuel and hot burning products created either inside an active turbulent burning region by a high intensity of turbulence, or by mixing cold fuel with ashes of a dead deflagration front during the global pulsation of a star, or by both.
Theoretical monochromatic light curves and photospheric expansion velocities are compared with observations of 27 Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). A set of 37 models has been considered which encompasses all currently discussed explosion scenarios for Type Ia supernovae including deflagrations, detonations, delayed detonations, pulsating delayed detonations and tamped detonations of Chandra- mass, and Helium detonations of low mass white dwarfs. The explosions are calculated using one-dimensional Lagrangian hydro and radiation-hydro codes with incorporated nuclear networks. Subsequently, light curves are constructed using our LC scheme which includes an implicit radiation transport, expansion opacities, a Monte-Carlo $\gamma $-ray transport, and molecular and dust formation. For some supernovae, results of detailed non-LTE calculations have been considered.   Observational properties of our series of models are discussed, the relation between the absolute brightness, post-maximum decline rates, the colors at several moments of time, etc. All models with a Ni production larger than 0.4 solar masses produce light curves of similar brightness. The influence of the cosmological red shift on the light curves and on the correction for interstellar reddening is discussed.   Based on data rectification of the standard deviation, a quantitative procedure to fit the observations has been used to the determine the free parameters, i.e. the correct model, the distance, the reddening, and the time of the explosion. The results are discussed in detail and applied to determine Ho and qo.
This work is based on the first results from a systematic search for high redshift Type Ia supernovae. Using filters in the R-band we discovered seven such SNe, with redshift z = 0.3 - 0.5, before or at maximum light. Type Ia SNe are known to be a homogeneous group of SNe, to first order, with very similar light curves, spectra and peak luminosities. In this talk we report that the light curves we observe are all broadened (time dilated) as expected from the expanding universe hypothesis. Small variations from the expected 1+z broadening of the light curve widths can be attributed to a width-brightness correlation that has been observed for nearby SNe (z<0.1). We show in this talk the first clear observation of the cosmological time dilation for macroscopic objects.
We calculate and discuss the chemical evolution of the isotopic silicon abundances in the interstellar medium at distances and times appropriate to the birth of the solar system. This has several objectives, some of which are related to anomalous silicon isotope ratios within presolar grains extracted from meteorites; namely: (1) What is the relative importance for silicon isotopic compositions in the bulk ISM of Type II supernovae, Type Ia supernovae, and AGB stars? (2) Are $^{29}$Si and $^{30}$Si primary or secondary nucleosynthesis products? (3) In what isotopic direction in a three-isotope plot do core-collapse supernovae of different mass move the silicon isotopic composition? (4) Why do present calculations not reproduce the solar ratios for silicon isotopes, and what does that impose upon studies of anomalous Si isotopes in meteoritic silicon carbide grains? (5) Are chemical-evolution features recorded in the anomalous SiC grains? Our answers are formulated on the basis of the Woosley \& Weaver (1995) supernova yield survey. Renormalization with the calculated interstellar medium silicon isotopic composition and solar composition is as an important and recurring concept of this paper. Possible interpretations of the silicon isotope anomalies measured in single SiC grains extracted from carbonaceous meteorites are then presented. The calculations suggest that the temporal evolution of the isotopic silicon abundances in the interstellar medium may be recorded in these grains.
We compare the observed correlations between the maximum brightness, postmaximum decline rate and color at maximum light of Type Ia supernovae (SN Ia) with model predictions.   The observations are based on a total of 40 SN Ia with 29 SN of the Calan Tololo Supernova Search and 11 local SN which cover a range of 2 mag in the absolute visual brightness.   The observed correlations are not tight, one dimensional relations. Supernovae with the same postmaximum decline or the same color have a spread in visual magnitude of about 0.7 mag. The dispersion in the color-magnitude relation may result from uncertainties in the distance determinations or the interstellar reddening within the host galaxy. The dispersion in the decline rate-magnitude relation suggests that an intrinsic spread in the supernova properties exists that cannot be accounted for by any single relation between visual brightness and postmaximum decline.   Theoretical correlations are derived from a grid of models which encompasses delayed detonations, pulsating delayed detonations, the merging scenario and helium detonations.   We find that the observed correlations can be understood in terms of explosions of Chandrasekhar mass white dwarfs.   Our models show an intrinsic spread in the relations of about 0.5 mag in the maximum brightness and about 0.1 mag in the B-V color.   Our study provides strong evidence against the mechanism of helium detonation for subluminous, red SN Ia.
The formation of neutrino spectra in a supernova depends crucially on strength and inelasticity of weak interactions in hot nuclear matter. Neutrino interactions with nonrelativistic nucleons are mainly governed by the dynamical structure function for the nucleon spin density which describes its fluctuations. It has recently been shown that these fluctuations give rise to a new mode of energy transfer between neutrinos and nucleons which inside the neutrinosphere is of comparable or greater importance than ordinary recoil. We calculate numerically the spin density structure function in the limit of a dilute, non-degenerate medium from exact two-nucleon wave functions for some representative nuclear interaction potentials. We show that spectrum and magnitude of the energy transfer can deviate significantly from those based on the Born approximation. They are, however, rather insensitive to the particular nuclear potential as long as it reproduces experimental nucleon scattering phase shifts at energies up to a few tens of MeV. We also compare with calculations based on a one-pion exchange potential in Born approximation and briefly comment on their applicability near the center of a supernova core. Our study is relevant for numerical simulations of the neutrino spectra emerging from type-II supernovae.
We present near-infrared (NIR) spectra for Type Ia supernovae at epochs of 13 to 338 days after maximum blue light. Some contemporary optical spectra are also shown. All the NIR spectra exhibit considerable structure throughout the J-, H- and K-bands. In particular they exhibit a flux `deficit' in the J-band which persists as late as 175 days. This is responsible for the well-known red J-H colour. To identify the emission features and test the $^{56}$Ni hypothesis for the explosion and subsequent light curve, we compare the NIR and optical nebular-phase data with a simple non-LTE nebular spectral model. We find that many of the spectral features are due to iron-group elements and that the J-band deficit is due to a lack of emission lines from species which dominate the rest of the IR/optical spectrum. Nevertheless, some emission is unaccounted for, possibly due to inaccuracies in the cobalt atomic data. For some supernovae, blueshifts of 1000--3000 km/s are seen in infrared and optical features at 3 months. We suggest this is due to clumping in the ejecta. The evolution of the cobalt/iron mass ratio indicates that $^{56}$Co-decay dominates the abundances of these elements. The absolute masses of iron-group elements which we derive support the basic thermonuclear explosion scenario for Type Ia supernovae. A core-collapse origin is less consistent with our data.
The suggestion that roughly half the mass of the galactic halo might be in the form of white dwarfs, together with the limits on the infrared background light and on the initial metallicity of the galactic disk, would set strong constraints on the initial mass function (IMF) of the halo. Particular IMFs have been proposed to cut off both the numbers of low-mass stars contributing to the infrared background and of high-mass stars which contribute to the growth of metallicity when they promptly explode as gravitational-collapse (Type II and Type Ib/c) supernovae. Here we examine the further contribution to metallicity from the Type Ia (thermonuclear) supernovae which would later be produced from the halo white dwarf population. We find that, for most of the evolutionary scenarios for the Type Ia supernova progenitor systems proposed so far, the constraints on the white dwarf mass fraction in the halo from the predicted production of iron would be extremely severe. When the predicted iron excess is not so large, then the exceedingly high Type Ia supernova rate predicted for the present time would also exclude a major contribution of white dwarfs to the halo mass. The white dwarf contribution, in all cases, should be below 5-10%. Besides, for the IMFs considered, the duration of the halo burst should be shorter than 1 Gyr in order to avoid too large a spread in the iron abundances of Population II halo dwarfs, and the predicted halo $[O/Fe]$ ratio would be at odds with observations.
The explosion mechanism associated with thermonuclear supernovae (SNIa) is still a matter of debate. There is a wide agreement that high amounts of of radioactive nuclei are produced during these events and they are expected to be strong gamma-ray emitters. In the past, several authors have investigated the use of this gamma-ray emission as a diagnostic tool. In this paper we have done a complete study of the gamma-ray spectra associated with all the different scenarios currently proposed. This includes detonation, delayed detonation, deflagration and the off-center detonation. We have performed accurate simulations for this complete set of models in order to determine the most promising spectral features that could be used to discriminate among the different models. Our study is not limited to qualitative arguments. Instead, we have quantified the differences among the spectra and established distance limits for their detection. The calculations have been performed considering the best current response estimations of the SPI and IBIS instruments aboard INTEGRAL in such a way that our results can be used as a guideline to evaluate the capabilities of INTEGRAL in the study of type Ia supernovae. For the purpose of completeness we have also investigated the nuclear excitation and spallation reactions as a possible secondary source of gamma-rays present in some supernova scenarios. We conclude that this mechanism can be neglected due to its small contribution.
In the common model supernova shock-acceleration of cosmic rays there are two open questions: 1. where does the high energy cosmic rays below the knee (10$^4-10^6$ Gev) come from, and 2. are cosmic ray accelerated only at their origin or contineuosly during their residence in the Galaxy. We show that $10^15$ eV light nuclei are probably accelerted by associations of supernovae. The ratio of the spectra of secondary to primary cosmic rays would be affected by repeated acceleration (also called reacceleration or secondary acceleration) in the ISM during their propagation in the galaxy. The observed secondary and primary CR spectra are used to constrain the amount of such reacceleration by supernova remnants (SNR). Two cases are considered: weak shocks ($1<M<2$) of old, dispersed remnants, and strong shocks ($M>3$) of relatively young remnants. It is shown that weak shocks produce more reacceleration than what is permitted in the framework of the standard leaky box (SLB) model, making it inconsistent with dispersed acceleration that should be produced by SNR. If the SLB is modified to allow a moderate amount of RA by week shocks, the RA produced by old SNRs agrees with the rate required to fit the secondary-to primaray cosmic-ray data, making a self consistent picture. Significant reacceleration by strong shocks of young SNRs should lead to flattening of the secondary-to primaray ratio at high energies, near 1TeV/nucleon.
The light curve of Supernova (SN) 1993J is calculated using two approaches to radiation transport as exemplified by the two computer codes, STELLA and EDDINGTON. Particular attention is paid to shock breakout and the photometry in the U, B, and V bands during the first 120 days. The hydrodynamical model, the explosion of a 13 Msun star which had lost most of its hydrogenic envelope to a companion, is the same in each calculation. The comparison elucidates differences between the approaches and also serves to validate the results of both. STELLA includes implicit hydrodynamics and is able to model supernova evolution at early times, before the expansion is homologous. STELLA also employs multi-group photonics and is able to follow the radiation as it decouples from the matter. EDDINGTON uses a different algorithm for integrating the transport equation, assumes homologous expansion, and uses a finer frequency resolution. Good agreement is achieved between the two codes only when compatible physical assumptions are made about the opacity. A new result for SN 1993J is a prediction of the continuum spectrum near the shock breakout (calculated by STELLA) which is superior to the results of other standard single energy group hydrocodes such as VISPHOT or TITAN. Based on the results of our independent codes, we discuss the uncertainties involved in the current time dependent models of supernova light curves.
Recent HST observations of the Crab Nebula show filamentary structures that appear to originate from the Rayleigh-Taylor (R-T) instability operating on the supernova ejecta accelerated by the pulsar-driven wind. In order to understand the origin and formation of the filaments in the Crab Nebula, we study the interaction of a pulsar wind with the uniformly expanding supernova remnant by means of numerical simulation. By performing two-dimensional numerical simulations, we find three independent instabilities in the interaction region between the pulsar wind and the expanding supernova remnant. The most important instability develops as the shock driven by the pulsar bubble becomes accelerated ($r \propto t^{6/5}$). The instability produces pronounced filamentary structures that resemble the observed filaments in the Crab Nebula. Our numerical simulations can reproduce important observational features of the Crab Nebula. The high density heads in the R-T finger tips are produced because of the compressibility of the gas. The density of these heads is found to be about 10 times higher than other regions in the fingers. The mass contained in the R-T fingers is found to be $60 % - 75 %$ of the total shocked mass and the kinetic energy within the R-T fingers is $55 % - 72 %$ of the total kinetic energy of the shocked flow. The R-T fingers are found to accelerate with a slower rate than the shock front, which is consistent with the observations. By comparing our simulations and the observations, we infer that the some finger-like filaments (region F or G in Hester's observation) started to develop about 657 years ago.
We present the serendipitous discovery of 16 ms pulsed X-ray emission from the Crab-like supernova remnant N157B in the Large Magellanic Cloud. This is the fastest spinning pulsar associated with a supernova remnant (SNR). Observations with the Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE), centered on the field containing SN1987A, reveal an X-ray pulsar with a narrow pulse profile. Archival ASCA X-ray data confirm this detection and locate the pulsar within 1' of the supernova remnant N157B, 14' from SN1987A. The pulsar manifests evidence for glitch(es) between the RXTE and ASCA observations which span 3.5 years; the mean linear spin-down rate is Pdot = 5.126 X 10E-14 s/s. The background subtracted pulsed emission is similar to other Crab-like pulsars with a power law of photon index of ~ 1.6. The characteristic spin-down age (~ 5000 years) is consistent with the previous age estimate of the SNR. The inferred B-field for a rotationally powered pulsar is ~ 1 X 10E12 Gauss. Our result confirms the Crab-like nature of N157B; the pulsar is likely associated with a compact X-ray source revealed by ROSAT HRI observations.
We study the scenario where the gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) arise from core-collapse of very massive stars in star-forming regions in the starburst galaxies at high redshift. The bimodial structure of the gamma-ray bursts point to their association with the two redshift peaks observed in the recent study of high-redshift galaxies; one of these regions involves massive star-forming galaxies of normal type at z~3, the other is related to the star formation in dwarf galaxies around z ~1. The cosmological time-dilation observed in GRBs is consistent with this picture and the time-dilation observed in high-redshift Type I supernovae. The details of the GRB characteristics, the nature of the starburst galaxies, and a failed-TypeI supernova/hypernova model of GRBs are discussed in several papers. In this paper II we discuss the details of star-formation in starburst galaxies both in the local universe and at high redshift, and we study the association of these star-forming regions with GRBs. The details of the failed-supernova/hypernova model of GRBs will be discussed in the next article (paper III). According to this model, the collapse of a massive star produces a dense torus of circumstellar material as well as a relativistic shock-wave accompanied by ejecta, which generate shells by impact with the material around the collapsed core, which in turn cause high-energy gamma-ray emission and the observed afterglow.
The recent discovery of the unusual supernova SN1998bw and its apparent correlation with the gamma-ray burst GRB 980425 has raised new issues concerning both the GRB and supernovae. Although the spectra resemble those of TypeIc supernovae, there are distinct differences at early times and SN1998bw appeared to be unusually bright and red at maximum light. The apparent expansion velocities inferred by the Doppler shift of (unidentified) absorption features appeared to be high, making SN1998bw a possible candidate for a "hypernova" with explosion energies between 20 and 50E51 erg and ejecta masses in excess of 6 - 15 M_o. Based on light curve calculations for aspherical explosions and guided by the polarization observations of "normal" SNIc and related events, we present an alternative picture that allows SN1998bw to have an explosion energy and ejecta mass consistent with core collapse supernovae (although at the 'bright' end). We show that the LC of SN1998bw can be understood as result of an aspherical explosion along the rotational axis of a basically spherical, non-degenerate C/O core of massive star with an explosion energy of 2foe and a total ejecta mass of 2 M_o if it is seen from high inclinations with respect to the plane of symmetry. In this model, the high expansion velocities are a direct consequence of an aspherical explosion which, in turn, produces oblate iso-density contours. It suggests that the fundamental core-collapse explosion process itself is strongly asymmetric.
The neutrinos from a Type II supernova provide perhaps our best opportunity to probe cosmologically interesting muon and/or tauon neutrino masses. This is because matter enhanced neutrino oscillations can lead to an anomalously hot nu_e spectrum, and thus to enhanced charged current cross sections in terrestrial detectors. Two recently proposed supernova neutrino observatories, OMNIS and LAND, will detect neutrons spalled from target nuclei by neutral and charged current neutrino interactions. As this signal is not flavor specific, it is not immediately clear whether a convincing neutrino oscillation signal can be extracted from such experiments. To address this issue we examine the responses of a series of possible light and heavy mass targets, 9Be, 23Na, 35Cl, and 208Pb. We find that strategies for detecting oscillations which use only neutron count rates are problematic at best, even if cross sections are determined by ancillary experiments. Plausible uncertainties in supernova neutrino spectra tend to obscure rate enhancements due to oscillations. However, in the case of 208Pb, a signal emerges that is largely flavor specific and extraordinarily sensitive to the nu_e temperature, the emission of two neutrons. This signal and its flavor specificity are associated with the strength and location of the first-forbidden responses for neutral and charge current reactions, aspects of the 208Pb neutrino cross section that have not been discussed previously. Hadronic spin transfer experiments might be helpful in confirming some of the nuclear structure physics underlying our conclusions.
The gamma-ray transfer in supernovae for the purposes of energy deposition in the ejecta can be approximated fairly accurately as frequency-integrated (grey) radiative transfer using a mean opacity as shown by Swartz, Sutherland, & Harkness (SSH). In SSH's grey radiative transfer procedure (unoptimized) the mean opacity is a pure absorption opacity and it is a constant aside from a usually weak composition dependence. In this paper, we present a variation on the SSH procedure which uses multiple mean opacities which have both absorption and scattering components. There is a mean opacity for each order of Compton scattering. A local-state (LS) approximation permits an analytic solution for the gamma-ray transfer of scattered gamma-ray fields. The LS approximation is admittedly crude, but the scattered fields are always of lesser importance to the energy deposition. We call our procedure the LS grey radiative transfer procedure or LS procedure for short. For a standard Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) model the uncertainty in gamma-ray energy deposition is estimated to be of order 10 % or less. The LS procedure code used for this paper can be obtained by request from the author.   For completeness and easy reference, we include in this paper a review of the gamma-ray opacities important in supernovae, a discussion of the appropriate mean opacity prescription, and a discussion of the errors arising from neglecting time-dependent and non-static radiative transfer effects.
We generate bolometric light curves for a variety of type Ia supernova models at late times, simulating gamma-ray and positron transport for various assumptions about the magnetic field and ionization of the ejecta. These calculated light curve shapes are compared with light curves of specific supernovae for which there have been adequate late observations. %The selection of models is generally not based upon the %ability to fit the late observations, but rather because the %model has been demonstrated by other authors to approximate the spectra %and early light curves of that specific SN.   From these comparisons we draw two conclusions: whether a suggested model is an acceptable approximation of a particular event, and, given that it is, the magnetic field characteristics and degree of ionization that are most consistent with the observed light curve shape. For the ten SNe included in this study, five strongly suggest $^{56}$Co positron escape as would be permitted by a weak or radially-combed magnetic field. Of the remaining five SNe, none clearly show the upturned light curve expected for positron trapping in a strong, tangled magnetic field. Chandrasekhar mass models can explain normally, sub-, and super- luminous supernova light curves; sub-Chandrasekhar mass models have difficulties with sub- (and potentially normally) luminous SNe. An estimate of the galactic positron production rate from type Ia SNe is compared with gamma-ray observations of Galactic 511 keV annihilation radiation. Additionally, we emphasize the importance of correctly treating the positron transport for calculations of spectra, or any properties, of type Ia SNe at late epochs ($\geq$ 200 d).
The most energetic part of the electromagnetic spectrum bears the purest clues to the synthesis of atomic nuclei in the universe. The decay of radioactive species, synthesized in stellar environments and ejected into the interstellar medium, gives rise to specific gamma ray lines. The observations gathered up to now show evidence for radioactivities throughout the galactic disk, in young supernova remnants (Cas A, Vela), and in nearby extragalactic supernovae (SN 1987A, SN 1991T and SN1998bu), in the form of specific gamma ray lines resulting, respectively, from the radioactive decay of 26Al, 44Ti and 56Co. The various astrophysical sites of thermal nucleosynthesis of the radioactive nuclei were discussed: AGB and Wolf-Rayet stars, novae, and type Ia and type II supernovae. Nuclear excitations by fast particles also produce gamma ray lines which have been observed in great detail from solar flares, and more hypothetically from active star forming regions where massive supernovae and WR stars abound. This non thermal process and its nucleosynthetic consequences was reviewed. The 511 keV line arising from e+ + e- annihilation also provides important information on explosive nucleosynthesis, as well as on the nature of the interstellar medium where the positrons annihilate. INTEGRAL, the main mission devoted to high resolution nuclear spectroscopy, should lead to important progress in this field.
Estimates of the cosmic star formation rate and of cluster metallicities independently imply that at z < 0.5 the gas in the universe has substantial average metallicity: 1/10 < Z/Z_solar < 1/3 for Omega_gas = 0.05. This metal density probably cannot be contained in known solar-metallicity galaxies of density parameter Omega_star ~ 0.004, implying significant enrichment of the intergalactic medium (IGM) by ejection of metals and dust from galaxies via winds, in mergers or in dust efflux driven by radiation pressure. Galaxies have a dust/metal ratio of ~ 0.5 in their interstellar media, but some fraction (1-f) > 0 of this must be destroyed in the IGM or during the ejection process. Assuming the Draine & Lee dust model and preferential destruction of small grains, I calculate the reddening and extinction of a uniform cosmological dust component in terms of (f) and the minimum grain size a_min. Very small grains provide most of the reddening but less than half of the opacity for optical extinction. For f > 0.3 and a_min > 0.1 microns, the intergalactic dust would be too grey to have been detected by its reddening, yet dense enough to be cosmologically important: it could account for the recently observed type Ia supernova dimming at z ~ 0.5 without cosmic acceleration. The importance of grey intergalactic dust of the described type can be tested by observations of z=0.5 supernovae in (rest) R-band or longer wavelengths and by the fluxes of a large sample of supernovae at z > 1. (Abridged)
Synthetic spectra generated with the parameterized supernova synthetic-spectrum code SYNOW are compared to observed photospheric-phase spectra of the Type Ic supernova 1994I. The observed optical spectra can be well matched by synthetic spectra that are based on the assumption of spherical symmetry. We consider the identification of the infrared absorption feature observed near 10,250 \AA, which previously has been attributed to He I $\lambda10830$ and regarded as strong evidence that SN 1994I ejected some helium. We have difficulty accounting for the infrared absorption with He I alone. It could be a blend of He I and C I lines. Alternatively, we find that it can be fit by Si I lines without compromising the fit in the optical region.   In synthetic spectra that match the observed spectra, from 4 days before to 26 days after the time of maximum brightness, the adopted velocity at the photosphere decreases from 17,500 to 7000 \kms. Simple estimates of the kinetic energy carried by the ejected mass give values that are near the canonical supernova energy of $10^{51}$ ergs. The velocities and kinetic energies that we find for SN 1994I in this way are much lower than those that we find elsewhere for the peculiar Type Ic SNe 1997ef and 1998bw, which therefore appear to have been hyper-energetic.
A survey of the inner 8$^\circ \times 1^\circ$ of the Galactic plane toward the Galactic center has been carried out at the 1720 MHz transition of OH molecule using the VLA in its D configuration with a resolution of $\approx70''\times45''$. The detection of compact 1720 MHz OH masers associated with three supernova remnants G357.7+0.3, G1.13--0.1 (Sgr D) and G1.4--0.1 as well as new extended maser line emission from G357.7+0.3 and G357.7--0.1 (the Tornado Nebula) were then followed up by A-array observations with spectral and spatial resolutions of 0.3 \kms and $\approx3''\times2''$, respectively.   The 1720 MHz OH maser line emission is considered to be a powerful shock diagnostic and is collisionally pumped by H$_2$ molecules at the site where C-type supernova shocks drive into adjacent molecular clouds. The new observations show clear evidence of extended features coincident with compact and bright masers, the best example of which is a coherent feature over a scale of about 20 pc surrounding the shell of the SNR G357.7+0.3. We argue that this remarkable feature is an OH maser and is physically associated with the remnant. This implies that the ambient molecular cloud is uniform in its density and temperature with restricted range of pumping conditions and survives the passage of a large-scale shock front.
We make a prediction of the cosmic supernova rate history as a composite of the supernova rates in spiral and elliptical galaxies. We include the metallicity effect on the evolution of Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) progenitors, and construct detailed models for the evolutions of spiral and elliptical galaxies in clusters and field to meet the latest observational constraints. In the cluster environment, the synthesized cosmic star formation rate (SFR) has an excess at $z \gtsim 3$ corresponding to the early star burst in ellipticals and a shallower slope from the present to the peak at the redshift of $z \sim 1.4$ compared with Madau's plot. In the field environment, we assume that ellipticals form over a wide range of redshifts as $1 \ltsim z \ltsim 4$. The synthesized cosmic SFR has a broad peak around $z \sim 3$, which is in good agreement with the observed one. The resultant cosmic SFRs lead to the following predictions for the cosmic SN Ia rate: 1) The SN Ia rate in spirals has a break at $z \sim 2$ due to the low-metallicity inhibition of SNe Ia, regardless of clusters or field. 2) At high redshifts, the SN Ia rate has a strong peak around $z \sim 3$ in clusters, whereas in field much lower rate is expected, reflecting the difference in the formation epochs of ellipticals.
A diverse range of phenomena is possible when a black hole experiences very rapid accretion from a disk due to the incomplete explosion of a massive presupernova star endowed with rotation. In the most extreme case, the outgoing shock fails promptly in a rotating helium star, a black hole and an accretion disk form, and a strong gamma-ray burst (GRB) results. However, there may also be more frequently realized cases where the black hole forms after a delay of from several tens of seconds to several hours as approximately 0.1 to 5 solar masses falls back into the collapsed remnant following a mildly successful supernova explosion. There, the same MHD mechanisms frequently invoked to produce GRBs would also produce jets in stars already in the process of exploding. The presupernova star could be a Wolf-Rayet star or a red or blue supergiant. Depending upon its initial pressure, the collimation of the jet may also vary since ``hot'' jets will tend to diverge and share their energy with the rest of the star. From these situations, one expects diverse outcomes ranging from GRBs with a large range of energies and durations, to asymmetric, energetic supernovae with weak GRBs. SN 1998bw may have been the explosion of a star in which fall back produced a black hole and a less collimated jet than in the case of prompt black hole formation.
Conversion from neutron stars to strange stars as a possible mechanism of cosmological gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) has been discussed in previous works, although the existence of strange stars is still an open question. On the basis of this mechanism, we here outline an explanation of the connection between supernovae (SNe) and GRBs, which has got increasing evidence recently. An asymmetric but normal SN explosion leaves a massive ($\geq1.8{\rm M_\odot}$) and rapidly rotating neutron star, which then converts to a strange star few days later, due to its rapid spindown. The accompanied fireball, which can be accelerated to ultra-relativistic velocity ($\Gamma_0\sim 100$) due to the very low baryon contamination of the strange star, flows out along the direction of the high-velocity SN jet and subsequently produces a GRB and the following low energy afterglows by interacting with the surrounding stellar wind. We will also expect a very luminous supernova like SN1998bw, if a large fraction of the conversion energy finally turns into the kinetic energy of the supernova ejecta.
The observation by the CANGAROO experiment of TeV emission from SN 1006, in conjunction with several instances of non-thermal X-ray emission from supernova remnants, has led to inferences of super-TeV electrons in these extended sources. While this is sufficient to propel the theoretical community in their modelling of particle acceleration and associated radiation, the anticipated emergence in the next decade of a number of new experiments probing the TeV and sub-TeV bands provides further substantial motivation for modellers. In particular, the quest for obtaining unambiguous gamma-ray signatures of cosmic ray ion acceleration defines a ``Holy Grail'' for observers and theorists alike. This review summarizes theoretical developments in the prediction of MeV-TeV gamma-rays from supernova remnants over the last five years, focusing on how global properties of models can impact, and be impacted by, hard gamma-ray observational programs, thereby probing the supernova remnant environment. Properties of central consideration include the maximum energy of accelerated particles, the density of the unshocked interstellar medium, the ambient magnetic field, and the relativistic electron-to-proton ratio. Criteria for determining good candidate remnants for observability in the TeV band are identified.
We present the results of deep ASCA observations of two shell-like radio supernova remnants (SNRs) located in the direction to the Galactic center (GC) region. Unlike the radio morphology, G359.1-0.5 shows center-filled X-rays with prominent K-alpha lines of He-like silicon and H-like sulfur. The plasma requires at least two temperature components: a silicon-dominated cool plasma of 0.6keV temperature and a sulfur-dominated higher temperature plasma of 4.4keV. Because the absorption column is ~ 6x10^22 H cm^-2, this SNR would be near to the GC. The spherical plasma is attributable to supernova ejecta with the total mass of Si and S being about 0.1 solar mass and 0.3 solar mass, respectively. X-rays from G359.0-0.9 trace the partial shell structure of the radio emission. The spectrum is well fitted to a single-temperature plasma of 0.4keV with a non-solar abundance of magnesium or iron. Because the absorption column is not very large, ~ 1.8x10^22 H cm^-2, G359.0-0.9 would be in front of the GC region. The total supernova energy, interstellar density near to the X-ray emitting shell and age of the SNR are estimated to be 1.2x10^51erg, 0.5cm^-3, and 1.8x10^4yr, respectively. We also discuss possible implications on the origin of the large-scale hot plasma surrounding the GC.
Relatively uniform light curves and spectral evolution of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) have led to the use of SNe Ia as a ``standard candle'' to determine cosmological parameters. Whether a statistically significant value of the cosmological constant can be obtained depends on whether the peak luminosities of SNe Ia are sufficiently free from the effects of cosmic and galactic evolutions.   Here we first review the single degenerate scenario for the Chandrasekhar mass white dwarf (WD) models of SNe Ia. We identify the progenitor's evolution and population with two channels: (1) the WD+RG (red-giant) and (2) the WD+MS (near main-sequence He-rich star) channels. In these channels, the strong wind from accreting WDs plays a key role, which yields important age and metallicity effects on the evolution.   We then address the questions whether the nature of SNe Ia depends systematically on environmental properties such as metallicity and age of the progenitor system and whether significant evolutionary effects exist. We suggest that the variation of the carbon mass fraction $X$(C) in the C+O WD (or the variation of the initial WD mass) causes the diversity of the brightness of SNe Ia. This model can explain the observed dependences of SNe Ia brightness on the galaxy types and the distance from the galactic center.   Finally, applying the metallicity effect on the evolution of SN Ia progenitors, we make a prediction of the cosmic supernova rate history as a composite of the supernova rates in different types of galaxies.
We study observational constraints on cosmological models with a quintessence field in the form of a dynamical pseudo Nambu-Goldstone boson. After reviewing the properties of the solutions, from a dynamical systems phase space analysis, we consider the constraints on parameter values imposed by luminosity distances from the 60 Type Ia supernovae published by Perlmutter et al., and also from gravitational lensing statistics of distant quasars. In the case of the Type Ia supernovae we explicitly allow for the possibility of evolution of the peak luminosities of the supernovae sources, using simple empirical models which have been recently discussed in the literature. We find weak evidence to suggest that the models with supernovae evolution fit the data better in the context of the quintessence models in question. If source evolution is a reality then the greatest challenge facing these models is the tension between current value of the expansion age, H_0 t_0, and the fraction of the critical energy density, Omega_{phi0}, corresponding to the scalar field. Nonetheless there are ranges of the free parameters which fit all available cosmological data.
We present two-dimensional high-resolution hydrodynamical simulations in spherical polar coordinates of a Type Ia supernova interacting with a constant density interstellar medium. The ejecta are assumed to be freely expanding with an exponential density profile. The interaction gives rise to a double-shocked structure susceptible to hydrodynamic instabilities. The Rayleigh-Taylor instability initially grows, but the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability takes over, producing vortex rings. The nonlinear instability initially evolves toward longer wavelengths and eventually fades away when the reverse shock front is in the flatter part of the supernova density distribution. Based on observations of X-ray knots and the protrusion in the southeast outlin of Tycho's supernova remnant, we include clumping in the ejecta. The clump interaction with the reverse shock induces Rayleigh-Taylor and Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities on the clump surface that facilitate fragmentation. In order to survive crushing and to have a bulging effect on the forward shock, the clump's initial density ratio to the surrounding ejecta must be at least 100 for the conditions in Tycho's remnant. The 56Ni bubble effect may be important for the development of clumpiness in the ejecta. The observed presence of an Fe clump would then require a non-radioactive origin for this Fe, possibly 54Fe. The large radial distance of the X-ray emitting Si and S ejecta from the remnant center indicates that they were initially in clumps.
With exact three-flavor Boltzmann neutrino transport, we simulate the stellar core collapse, bounce, and postbounce evolution of a 13 solar mass star in spherical symmetry, the Newtonian limit, without invoking convection. In the absence of convection, prior spherically symmetric models, which implemented approximations to Boltzmann transport, failed to produce explosions. We are motivated to consider exact transport to determine if these failures were due to the transport approximations made and to answer remaining fundamental questions in supernova theory. The model presented here is the first in a sequence of models beginning with different progenitors. In this model, a supernova explosion is not obtained. We discuss the ramifications of our results for the supernova mechanism.
We present empirical fits to the UBVRI light curves of type Ia supernovae. These fits are used to objectively evaluate light curve parameters. We find that the relative times of maximum light in the filter passbands are very similar for most objects. Surprisingly the maximum at longer wavelengths is reached earlier than in the B and V light curves. This clearly demonstrates the complicated nature of the supernova emission. Bolometric light curves for a small sample of well-observed SNe Ia are constructed by integration over the optical filters. In most objects a plateau or inflection is observed in the light curve about 20-40 days after bolometric maximum. The strength of this plateau varies considerably among the individual objects in the sample. Furthermore the rise times show a range of several days for the few objects which have observations early enough for such an analysis. On the other hand, the decline rate between 50 and 80 days past maximum is remarkably similar for all objects, with the notable exception of SN 1991bg. The similar late decline rates for the supernovae indicate that the energy release at late times is very uniform; the differences at early times is likely due to the radiation diffusing out of the ejecta. With the exception of SN 1991bg, the range of absolute bolometric luminosities of SNe Ia is found to be at least a factor of 2.5. The nickel masses derived from this estimate range from 0.4 to 1.1 Msun. It seems impossible to explain such a mass range by a single explosion mechanism, especially since the rate of gamma-ray escape at late phases seems to be very uniform.
We have compiled a sample of 45 Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) discovered by the Lick Observatory Supernova Search (LOSS) and the Beijing Astronomical Observatory Supernova Survey (BAOSS), and determined the rate of spectroscopically peculiar SNe Ia (i.e., SN 1986G-like, SN 1991bg-like, and SN 1991T-like objects) and the luminosity function of SNe Ia. Because of the nature of the two surveys (distance-limited with small baselines and deep limiting magnitudes), nearly all SNe Ia have been discovered in the sample galaxies of LOSS and BAOSS; thus, the observed peculiarity rate and luminosity function of SNe Ia are intrinsic. We find that 36$\pm$9% of nearby SNe Ia are peculiar; specifically, the luminosity function of SNe Ia consists of 20% SN 1991T-like, 64% normal, and 16% SN 1991bg-like objects. We have compared our results to those found by earlier studies, and to those found at high redshift. The apparent dearth of SN 1991T-like objects at high redshift may be due to extinction, and especially to the difficulty of recognizing them from spectra obtained past maximum brightness or from spectra with low signal-to-noise ratios. Implications of the high peculiarity rate for the progenitor systems of SNe Ia are also briefly discussed.
We report the results of a BeppoSAX observation of the composite supernova remnant G0.9+0.1, located in the Galactic Center region. This new observation, in which the core of G0.9+0.1 is observed on-axis, confirms our previous results obtained from a pointing in which the supernova remnant was serendipitously observed at a large off-axis angle. The better quality of the new data allows us to confirm the non-thermal nature of the X-ray source coincident with the central plerion, to significantly improve the estimate of its spectral parameters, to put more stringent upper limits on the presence of coherent pulsations (in the range of periods from 4ms to ~ 4\times10^4 s), to obtain marginal evidence of the possible extended nature of the X-ray plerion and to put a better upper limit on the 2--10 keV X-ray emission from the 8' diameter radio shell (L$_{\rm S}<3.4\times 10^{34} {\rm d}_{10}^{2}$ erg s^{-1}). The X-ray spectrum is best fit with a power-law model with a photon index \Gamma ~ 2, N_{\rm H} ~ 10^{23} \hcm and a 2-10 keV luminosity of 7.5\times 10^{34} {\rm d}_{10}^{2} erg s^{-1}. The broad band (radio-X-ray) properties of the composite supernova remnant G0.9+0.1 are indicative of the likely presence of a young (~ 2,700 yr) neutron star in its central radio core.
Since their discovery 30 years ago, pulsars have been understood to be neutron stars (NSs) born rotating rapidly (~ 10-100 ms). These neutron stars are thought to be created in supernova explosions involving massive stars, which give rise to expanding supernova remnants (SNRs). With over 220 Galactic SNRs known (Green 1998) and over 1200 radio pulsars detected (Camilo et al. 2000), it is quite surprising that few associations between the two populations have been identified with any certainty. Here we report the discovery of a remarkable 0.3 sec X-ray pulsar, PSR J1846-0258, associated with the supernova remnant Kes 75. With a characteristic age of only 723 yr, consistent with the age of Kes 75, PSR J1846-0258 is the youngest pulsar yet discovered and is being rapidly spun down by torques from a large magnetic dipole of strength ~ 5E13 G, just above the so-called quantum critical field. PSR J1846-0258 resides in this transitional regime where the magnetic field is hypothesized to separate the regular pulsars from the so-called magnetars. PSR J1846-0258 is evidently a Crab-like pulsar, however, its period, spin-down rate, spin-down conversion efficiency, are each an order-of-magnitude greater, likely the result of its extreme magnetic field.
The dependence of luminosity distance on observed resdhift and the cosmological parameters H and q is derived for a contracting Friedmann universe with no cosmological constant. The result is consistent with recent supernovae observations.
We examine the magnetic reconnection triggered by a supernova (or a point explosion) in interstellar medium, by performing two-dimensional resistive magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) numerical simulations with high spatial resolution. We found that the magnetic reconnection starts long after a supernova shock (fast-mode MHD shock) passes a current sheet. The current sheet evolves as follows: (i) Tearing-mode instability is excited by the supernova shock, and the current sheet becomes thin in its nonlinear stage. (ii) The current-sheet thinning is saturated when the current-sheet thickness becomes comparable to that of Sweet-Parker current sheet. After that, Sweet-Parker type reconnection starts, and the current-sheet length increases. (iii) ``Secondary tearing-mode instability'' occurs in the thin Sweet-Parker current sheet. (iv) As a result, further current-sheet thinning occurs and anomalous resistivity sets in, because gas density decreases in the current sheet. Petschek type reconnection starts and heats interstellar gas. Magnetic energy is released quickly while magnetic islands are moving in the current sheet during Petschek type reconnection. The released magnetic energy is determined by the interstellar magnetic field strength, not energy of initial explosion nor distance to explosion. We suggest that magnetic reconnection is a possible mechanism to generate X-ray gas in Galaxy.
A field of ~38'x38' around the supernova remnant (SNR) G349.7+0.2 has been surveyed in the CO J=1-0 transition with the 12 Meter Telescope of the NRAO, using the On-The-Fly technique. The resolution of the observations is 54". We have found that this remnant is interacting with a small CO cloud which, in turn, is part of a much larger molecular complex, which we call the ``Large CO Shell''. The Large CO Shell has a diameter of about 100 pc, an H_2 mass of 930,000 solar masses, and a density of 35 cm-3. We investigate the origin of this structure and suggest that an old supernova explosion ocurred about 4 million years ago, as a suitable hypothesis. Analyzing the interaction between G349.7+0.2 and the Large CO Shell, it is possible to determine that the shock front currently driven into the molecular gas is a non-dissociative shock (C-type), in agreement with the presence of OH 1720 MHz masers. The positional and kinematical coincidence among one of the CO clouds that constitute the Large CO Shell, an IRAS point-like source and an ultracompact H II region, indicate the presence of a recently formed star. We suggest that the formation of this star was triggered during the expansion of the Large CO Shell, and suggest the possibility that the same expansion also created the progenitor star of G349.7+0.2. The Large CO Shell would then be one of the few observational examples of supernova-induced star formation.
We present spectral analysis of early observations of the Type IIn supernova 1998S using the general non-local thermodynamic equilibrium atmosphere code \tt PHOENIX}. We model both the underlying supernova spectrum and the overlying circumstellar interaction region and produce spectra in good agreement with observations. The early spectra are well fit by lines produced primarily in the circumstellar region itself, and later spectra are due primarily to the supernova ejecta. Intermediate spectra are affected by both regions. A mass-loss rate of order $\dot M \sim 0.0001-0.001$\msol yr$^{-1}$ is inferred for a wind speed of 100-1000 \kmps. We discuss how future self-consistent models will better clarify the underlying progenitor structure.
We examine the characteristics of nucleosynthesis in 'hypernovae', i.e., supernovae with very large explosion energies ($ \gsim 10^{52} $ ergs). We carry out detailed nucleosynthesis calculations for these energetic explosions and compare the yields with those of ordinary core-collapse supernovae. We find that both complete and incomplete Si-burning takes place over more extended, lower density regions, so that the alpha-rich freezeout is enhanced and produces more Ti in comparison with ordinary supernova nucleosynthesis. In addition, oxygen and carbon burning takes place in more extended, lower density regions than in ordinary supernovae. Therefore, the fuel elements O, C, Al are less abundant while a larger amount of Si, S, Ar, and Ca ("Si") are synthesized by oxygen burning; this leads to larger ratios of "Si"/O in the ejecta. Enhancement of the mass ratio between complete and incomplete Si-burning regions in the ejecta may explain the abundance ratios among iron-peak elements in metal-poor stars. Also the enhanced "Si"/O ratio may explain the abundance ratios observed in star burst galaxies. We also discuss other implications of enhanced [Ti/Fe] and [Fe/O] for Galactic chemical evolution and the abundances of low mass black hole binaries.
We present the results of a FUSE observation of an X-ray selected knot in the Vela supernova remnant. Spectra were obtained through the 30"x30" low resolution aperture and the 4"x20" medium resolution aperture. O VI 1032,1038 and C III 977 are detected strongly in both spectra, and S VI 933,944 is detected weakly only in the larger aperture spectrum. We also report the first detection of C II 1037 emission in a supernova remnant. The spectra show the presence of two kinematic components along the line of sight - one with both low and high excitation emission centered at a velocity of -50 km/s and another with only low excitation emission centered at a velocity of +100 km/s. We associate the -50 km/s component with the observed X-ray knot, and find a dynamical pressure of 3.7x10^{-10} dyne cm^{-2} driving the shock. We compare our results with data obtained using the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope at nearby locations and find that differences in the spectra imply the existence of two emitting components in the X-ray knot. Based on the X-ray morphology seen in a ROSAT HRI image, we identify two distinct regions which can be associated with these two components whose ultraviolet emission differs dramatically. These observations demonstrate the importance of high spectral resolution in understanding the proper physical relationships between the various emitting components in supernova remnants.
We study the m-z relation for Type Ia supernovae data and the \theta-z relation for the updated compact radio sources data in 4 variable \Lambda- models: \Lambda \sim S^{-2}, \Lambda \sim H^2, \Lambda \sim \rho and \Lambda \sim t^{-2}.   It is found that all the models fit the data sets equally well and require non-zero, positive values of \Lambda. The supernovae data favour an accelerating expansion of the universe whereas the radio sources data imply either sign of the deceleration parameter. The estimates of the density parameter for the variable \Lambda-models are found higher than those for the constant \Lambda-Friedmann model. It is also found that the Gurvits et al' model (FRW model with \Lambda=0) is not the best-fitting model for the constant \Lambda case. The best-fitting Friedmann model (with constant \Lambda) is found to be a low density, vacuum-dominated accelerating universe. However, for realistic values of the matter density parameter, the only interesting solutions are (a) estimated from the supernovae data: the best-fit solutions for the flat models (including the constant \Lambda case); (b) estimated from the radio sources data: the global best-fit solutions for the models \Lambda \sim H^2 and \Lambda \sim \rho, the best-fit solution for the flat model with \Lambda=constant and the Gurvits et al' model.   It is noted that, as in the case of recent CMB analyses, the data sets seem to favour a spherical universe (k>0).
Recent observations suggest that gamma ray bursts (GRBs) and their afterglows are produced by highly relativistic jets emitted in core collapse supernova explosions (SNe). The result of the event, probably, is not just a compact object plus a spherical ejecta: within days, a fraction of the parent star falls back to produce a thick accretion disk around the compact object. Instabilities in the disk induce sudden collapses with ejection of highly relativistic ``cannonballs'' of plasma, similar to those ejected by microquasars. The jet of cannonballs exit the supernova shell/ejecta reheated by their collision with it, emitting highly forward-collimated radiation which is Doppler shifted to $\gamma$-ray energy. Each cannonball corresponds to an individual pulse in a GRB. They decelerate by sweeping up the ionised interstellar matter in front of them, part of which is accelerated to cosmic-ray energies and emits synchrotron radiation: the afterglow. The Cannonball Model cannot predict the timing sequence of these pulses, but it fares very well in describing the total energy, energy spectrum, and time-dependence of the individual $\gamma$-ray pulses and afterglows. It also predicts that GRB pulses are accompanied by detectable short pulses of TeV neutrinos and sub TeV $\gamma$-rays, that are much more energetic and begin and peak a little earlier.
We report on the X-ray observation of the radio selected supernova SN1979C carried out with ASCA in 1997 December and serendipitously available from a Chandra Guaranteed Time Observation in 1999 November. The supernova, of type SN II-Linear (SN IIL), was first observed in the optical and occurred in the weakly barred, almost face on spiral galaxy NGC 4321 (M100). The galaxy, a member of the Virgo S cluster, is at a distance of 17.1 Mpc, and contains at least three other supernovae discovered in this century. The useful exposure time was ~25 ks for the Solid-State Imaging Spectrometer (SIS), ~28 ks for the Gas Scintillation Imaging Spectrometer (GIS), and ~2.5 ks for Chandra's Advanced CCD Imaging Spectrometer (ACIS). No point source was detected at the radio position of SN1979C in a 3' diameter half power response circle in the ASCA data. The background and galaxy subtracted SN signal had a 3sigma upper limit to the flux of 6.3x10^-14 ergs/s/cm^-2 in the full ASCA SIS band (0.4-10.0 keV) and a 3sigma upper limit of <3-4x10^-14 erg/s/cm^2 in the 2-10 keV band. In the Chandra data, a source at the position of SN1979C is marginally detected at energies below 2 keV at a flux consistent with the ROSAT HRI detection in 1995. At energies above 2 keV, no source is detected with an upper limit of ~3x10^-14 erg/s/cm^-2. These measurements give the first ever x-ray flux limit of a Type IIL SN above 2 keV which is an important diagnostic of the outgoing shock wave ploughing through the circumstellar medium.
We study nucleosynthesis in 'hypernovae', i.e., supernovae with very large explosion energies ($ \gsim 10^{52} $ ergs) for both spherical and aspherical explosions. The hypernova yields compared to those of ordinary core-collapse supernovae show the following characteristics: 1) Complete Si-burning takes place in more extended region, so that the mass ratio between the complete and incomplete Si burning regions is generally larger in hypernovae than normal supernovae. As a result, higher energy explosions tend to produce larger [(Zn, Co)/Fe], small [(Mn, Cr)/Fe], and larger [Fe/O], which could explain the trend observed in very metal-poor stars. 2) Si-burning takes place in lower density regions, so that the effects of $\alpha$-rich freezeout is enhanced. Thus $^{44}$Ca, $^{48}$Ti, and $^{64}$Zn are produced more abundantly than in normal supernovae. The large [(Ti, Zn)/Fe] ratios observed in very metal poor stars strongly suggest a significant contribution of hypernovae. 3) Oxygen burning also takes place in more extended regions for the larger explosion energy. Then a larger amount of Si, S, Ar, and Ca ("Si") are synthesized, which makes the "Si"/O ratio larger. The abundance pattern of the starburst galaxy M82 may be attributed to hypernova explosions. Asphericity in the explosions strengthens the nucleosynthesis properties of hypernovae except for "Si"/O. We thus suggest that hypernovae make important contribution to the early Galactic (and cosmic) chemical evolution.
We study the potential impact of improved future supernovae data on our understanding of the dark energy problem. We carefully examine the relative utility of different fitting functions that can be used to parameterize the dark energy models, and provide concrete reasons why a particular choice (based on a parameterization of the equation of state) is better in almost all cases. We discuss the details of a representative sample of dark energy models and show how future supernova observations could distinguish among these. As a specific example, we consider the proposed ``SNAP'' satellite which is planned to observe around 2000 supernovae. We show how a SNAP-class data set taken alone would be a powerful discriminator among a family of models that would be approximated by a constant equation of state for the most recent epoch of cosmic expansion. We show how this family includes most of the dark energy models proposed so far. We then show how an independent measurement of $\Omega_{\rm m}$ can allow SNAP to probe the evolution of the equation of state as well, allowing further discrimination among a larger class of proposed dark energy models. We study the impact of the satellite design parameters on this method to distinguish the models and compare SNAP to alternative measurements. We establish that if we exploit the full precision of SNAP it provides a very powerful probe.
The properties of the Galactic HI shell GSH 138-01-94 are derived from data of the Canadian Galactic Plane Survey. The basic parameters of GSH 138-01-94 were determined by fitting the expansion of a thin shell to the expansion velocity field on the sky. The kinematic distance is 16.6 kpc for v_LSR=-94.2 $\pm$ 0.5 km/s. The radius is 180 $\pm$ 10 pc, the expansion velocity v_exp = 11.8 $\pm$ 0.9 km/s, and the mass 2 * 10^5 M_sun. No radio continuum counterpart of the shell was detected at 21 cm or at 74 cm. Absorption of a background continuum source constrains the spin temperature of \HI in the shell to T_s=230^{367}_{173} K. The expansion age of GSH 138-01-94 is 4.3 Myr. These observables are in excellent agreement with predictions from hydrodynamic models for a supernova remnant in a low-density low-metallicity environment such as the outer Galaxy. GSH 138-01-94 is then the largest and the oldest supernova remnant known. It provides direct evidence for the release of mechanical energy in the interstellar medium by stars in the outer galaxy. It is argued that such old supernova remnants be found in low-density, low-metallicity environments such as the outer Galaxy, dwarf galaxies and low surface brightness galaxies.
We examined effects of the ultraviolet background radiation (UVB) on the colour--magnitude relation (CMR) of elliptical galaxies in clusters of galaxies in the hierarchical clustering scenario by using a semi-analytic model of galaxy formation. In our model the UVB photoionizes gas in dark haloes and suppresses the cooling of the diffuse hot gas onto galaxy discs. By using a semi-analytic model without the effect of the UVB, Kauffmann & Charlot found that the CMR can be reproduced by strong supernova heating because such supernova feedback suppresses the chemical enrichment in galaxies especially for small galaxies. We find that the CMR also becomes bluer because of the UVB, in a different way from the effect of supernova feedback. While the supernova feedback suppresses the chemical enrichment by a similar mechanism to galactic wind, the UVB suppresses the cooling of the hot gas. This fact induces the suppression of the metallicity of the intracluster medium (ICM). In our model we find that the existence of the UVB can plausibly account for an observed ICM metallicity that is equal to nearly 0.3 times the solar value, and that in this case we can reproduce the CMR and the metallicity of the ICM simultaneously.
The interstellar medium of low-metallicity systems undergoing star formation will show chemical abundance inhomogeneities due to supernova events enriching the medium on a local scale. If the star formation time-scale is shorter than the time-scale of mixing of the interstellar matter, the inhomogeneities are reflected in the surface abundances of low-mass stars and thereby detailed information on the nucleosynthesis in the first generations of supernovae is preserved. Characteristic patterns and substructures are therefore expected to be found, apart from the large scatter behaviour, in the distributions of stars when displayed in diagrams relating different element abundance ratios. These patterns emerge from specific variations with progenitor stellar mass of the supernova yields and it is demonstrated that the patterns are insensitive to the initial mass function (IMF) even though the relative density of stars within the patterns may vary. An analytical theory of the formation of patterns is presented and it is shown that from a statistical point of view the abundance ratios can trace the different nucleosynthesis sites even when mixing of the interstellar medium occurs. Using these results, it should be possible to empirically determine supernova yields from the information on relative abundance ratios of a large, homogeneous sample of extremely metal-poor Galactic halo stars.
Underlying cosmologies with deceleration parameter, $q_0=-0.51^{+0.03}_{-0.24},$ may be interpreted as having $q_0=-0.55,$ on the basis of weak gravitational lensing effects.
Israelian et al. (1999) showed that the stellar companion of the black-hole binary Nova Sco is polluted with material ejected in the supernova that accompanied the formation of the black-hole primary. Here we systematically investigate the implications of these observations for the black-hole formation process. Using a variety of supernova models, including both standard as well as hypernova models (for different helium-star masses, explosion energies, and explosion geometries) and a simple model for the evolution of the binary and the pollution of the secondary, we show that most of the observed abundance anomalies can be explained for a large range of model parameters (apart from the abundance of Ti). The best models are obtained for He star masses of 10 to 16 Msun, where spherical hypernova models are generally favoured over standard supernova ones. Aspherical hypernova models also produce acceptable fits, provided there is extensive lateral mixing. All models require substantial fallback and that the fallback material either reached the orbit of the secondary or was mixed efficiently with material that escaped. The black hole therefore formed in a two-step process, where the initial mass of the collapsed remnant was increased substantially by matter that fell back after the initial collapse. This may help to explain the high observed space velocity of Nova Sco either because of a neutrino-induced kick (if a neutron star was formed first) or by asymmetric mass ejection in an asymmetric supernova explosion.
In an effort to better calibrate the supernova rate of starburst galaxies as determined from near-IR [Fe II] features, we report on a [Fe II] 1.644 microns line-imaging survey of a sample of 42 optically-selected SNRs in M33. A wide range of [Fe II] luminosities are observed within our sample (from less than 6 to 695 L_sun). Our data suggest that the bright [Fe II] SNRs are entering the radiative phase and that the density of the local ISM largely controls the amount of [Fe II] emission. We derive the following relation between the [Fe II] 1.644 microns line luminosity of radiative SNRs and the electronic density of the postshock gas, n_e: L_[Fe II] (L_sun) ~ 1.1 n_e (cm^-3). We also find a correlation in our data between L_[Fe II] and the metallicity of the shock-heated gas, but the physical interpretation of this result remains inconclusive, as our data also show a correlation between the metallicity and n_e. The dramatically higher level of [Fe II] emission from SNRs in the central regions of starburst galaxies is most likely due to their dense environments, although metallicity effects might also be important. The typical [Fe II]-emitting lifetime of a SNR in the central regions of starburst galaxies is found to be of the order of 10^4 yr. On the basis of these results, we provide a new empirical relation allowing the determination of the current supernova rate of starburst galaxies from their integrated near-IR [Fe II] luminosity.
We review the characteristics of nucleosynthesis in 'Hypernovae', i.e., supernovae with very large explosion energies ($ \gsim 10^{52} $ ergs). The hypernova yields compared to those of ordinary core-collapse supernovae show the following characteristics: 1) Complete Si-burning takes place in more extended region, so that the mass ratio between the complete and incomplete Si burning regions is generally larger in hypernovae than normal supernovae. As a result, higher energy explosions tend to produce larger [(Zn, Co)/Fe], smaller [(Mn, Cr)/Fe], and larger [Fe/O], which could explain the trend observed in very metal-poor stars. 2) Si-burning takes place in lower density regions, so that the effects of $\alpha$-rich freezeout is enhanced. Thus $^{44}$Ca, $^{48}$Ti, and $^{64}$Zn are produced more abundantly than in normal supernovae. The large [(Ti, Zn)/Fe] ratios observed in very metal-poor stars strongly suggest a significant contribution of hypernovae. 3) Oxygen burning also takes place in more extended regions for the larger explosion energy. Then a larger amount of Si, S, Ar, and Ca ("Si") are synthesized, which makes the "Si"/O ratio larger. The abundance pattern of the starburst galaxy M82 may be attributed to hypernova explosions. Asphericity in the explosions strengthens the nucleosynthesis properties of hypernovae except for "Si"/O. We thus suggest that hypernovae make important contribution to the early Galactic (and cosmic) chemical evolution.
We use two-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations to investigate the properties of dense ejecta clumps (bullets) in a core collapse supernova remnant, motivated by the observation of protrusions probably caused by clumps in the Vela supernova remnant. The ejecta, with an inner flat and an outer steep power law density distribution, were assumed to freely expand into an ambient medium with a constant density, $\sim 0.1$ H atoms cm$^{-3}$ for the case of Vela. At an age of $10^4$ yr, the reverse shock front is expected to have moved back to the center of the remnant. Ejecta clumps with an initial density contrast $\chi \sim 100$ relative to their surroundings are found to be rapidly fragmented and decelerated. In order to cause a pronounced protrusion on the blast wave, as observed in the Vela remnant, $\chi \sim 1000$ may be required. In this case, the clump should be near the inflection point in the ejecta density profile, at an ejecta velocity $\sim 3000 \kms $. These results apply to moderately large clumps; smaller clumps would require an even larger density contrast. Clumps can create ring structure in the shell of the Vela remnant and we investigate the possibility that RX J0852--4622, an apparent supernova remnant superposed on Vela, is actually part of the Vela shell. Radio observations support this picture, but the possible presence of a compact object argues against it. The Ni bubble effect or compression in a pulsar wind nebula are possible mechanisms to produce the clumping.
We present results from two Chandra/ACIS observations of the so-called Vela ``Bullet D'' region on the eastern limb of the Vela supernova remnant. The Bullet D region is a bright X-ray feature, identified by Aschenbach et al. (1995) from the ROSAT All-Sky Survey, which protrudes beyond the blast wave on the eastern side of the remnant. It has been suggested that this feature is a fragment of supernova ejecta which is just now pushing beyond the position of the main blast wave. An alternate explanation is that the feature is a ``break-out'' of the shock in which inhomogeneities in the ambient medium cause the shock to be non-spherical. The Chandra image shows a fragmented, filamentary morphology within this region. The Chandra spectra show strong emission lines of O, Ne, and Mg. Equilibrium ionization models indicate that the O and Ne abundances are significantly enhanced compared to solar values. However, non-equilibrium ionization models can fit the data with solar O abundances and Ne abundances enhanced by only a factor of two. The Chandra data are more consistent with the shock breakout hypothesis, although they cannot exclude the fragment of ejecta hypothesis.
The prescient remark by Baade and Zwicky that supernovae beget neutron stars did little to prepare us for the remarkable variety of observational manifestations such objects display. Indeed, during the first thirty years of the empirical study of neutron stars, only a handful were found to be associated with the remnants of exploded stars. But recent X-ray and radio observations have gone a long way toward justifying the theoretical link between supernovae and neutron stars, and have revealed the wide range of properties with which newborn compact remnants are endowed. We review here our current state of knowledge regarding neutron star-supernova remnant associations, pointing out the pitfalls and the promise which such links hold. We discuss work on the ranges of neutron star velocities, initial spin periods, and magnetic field strengths, as well as on the prevalence of pulsar wind nebulae. The slots in neutron star demography held by AXPs, SGRs, radio-quiet neutron stars, and other denizens of the zoo are considered. We also present an attempt at a comprehensive census of neutron star-remnant associations and discuss the selection effects militating against finding more such relationships. We conclude that there is no pressing need to invoke large black hole or silent neutron star populations, and that the years ahead hold great promise for producing a more complete understanding of neutron star birth parameters and their subsequent evolution.
We have compiled optical and radio astrometric data of the microquasar LS 5039 and derived its proper motion. This, together with the distance and radial velocity of the system, allows us to state that this source is escaping from its own regional standard of rest, with a total systemic velocity of about 150 km/s and a component perpendicular to the galactic plane larger than 100 km/s. This is probably the result of an acceleration obtained during the supernova event that created the compact object in this binary system. We have computed the trajectory of LS 5039 in the past, and searched for OB associations and supernova remnants in its path. In particular, we have studied the possible association between LS 5039 and the supernova remnant G016.8-01.1, which, despite our efforts, remains dubious. We have also discovered and studied an HI cavity in the ISM, which could have been created by the stellar wind of LS 5039 or by the progenitor of the compact object in the system. Finally, in the symmetric supernova explosion scenario, we estimate that at least 17 solar masses were lost in order to produce the high eccentricity observed. Such a mass loss could also explain the observed runaway velocity of the microquasar.
We explore the prospects for using future supernova observations to probe the dark energy. We focus on quintessence, an evolving scalar field that has been suggested as a candidate for the dark energy. After simulating the observations that would be expected from the proposed SuperNova / Acceleration Probe satellite (SNAP), we investigate two methods for extracting information about quintessence from such data. First, by expanding the quintessence equation of state as w_Q(z) = w_Q(0)-alpha*ln(1+z), to fit the data, it is possible to reconstruct the quintessence potential for a wide range of smoothly varying potentials. Second, it will be possible, to test the basic properties of the dark energy by constraining the parameters Omega_Q, w_Q and alpha. We show that it may be possible, for example, to distinguish between quintessence and the cosmological constant in this way. Further, when supernova data are combined with other planned cosmological observations, the precision of reconstructions and parameter constraints is significantly improved, allowing a wider range of dark energy models to be distinguished.
Two long observations of Cas A supernova remnant were made by the \emph{Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer} in 1996 and 1997 to search for hard X-ray line emission at 67.9 and 78.4 keV from decay of $^{44}$Ti formed during the supernova event. Continuum flux was detected up to 100 keV, but the $^{44}$Ti lines were not detected. The 90% confidence upper limit to the line flux is 3.6$\times10^{-5}$ photons cm$^{-2}$s$^{-1}$. This is consistent with the recent \emph{BeppoSAX} detection and with the \emph{CGRO}/COMPTEL detection of the companion transition line flux for $^{44}$Sc decay. The mean \emph{BeppoSAX}--COMPTEL flux indicates that 1.5$\pm$0.3 $\times10^{-4}$M$_\odot$ of $^{44}$Ti was produced in the supernova explosion. Based upon recent theoretical calculations, and optical observations suggesting a WN Wolf-Rayet progenitor with an initial mass of $\geq$25 M$_\odot$, the observed $^{44}$Ti yield implies that the Cas A supernova ejecta energy was $\sim2\times10^{51}$ ergs, and as a result a neutron star was formed, rather than a black hole. We suggest Cas A is possibly in the early stages of the AXP/SGR scenario in which the push-back disk has yet to form, and when the disk does form, the accretion will increase the luminosity to that of present-day AXP/SGRs and pulsed emission will commence.
With the exception of the Big Bang, responsible for 1,2H, 3,4He, and 7Li, stars act as sources for the composition of the interstellar medium. Cosmic rays are related to the latter and very probably due to acceleration of the mixed interstellar medium by shock waves from supernova remnants. Thus, the understanding of the abundance evolution in the interstellar medium and especially the enrichment of heavy elements, as a function of space and time, is essential. It reflects the history of star formation and the lifetimes of the diverse contributing stellar objects. Therefore, the understanding of the endpoints of stellar evolution is essential as well. These are mainly planetary nebulae and type II/Ib/Ic supernovae as evolutionary endpoints of single stars, but also events in binary systems can contribute, like e.g. supernovae of type Ia, novae and possibly X-ray bursts and neutron star or neutron star - black hole mergers. Despite many efforts, a full and self-consistent understanding of supernovae (the main contributors to nucleosynthesis in galaxies) is not existing, yet. Their fingerprints, however, seen either in spectra, lightcurves, radioactivities/decay gamma-rays or in galactic evolution, can help to constrain the composition of their ejecta and related model uncertainties.
There are many different approaches to using observations to constrain or determine the global cosmological parameters that describe our universe. Methods that rely upon a determination of the coordinate distance to high-redshift sources are particularly useful because they do not involve assumptions about the clustering properties of matter, or the evolution of this clustering.   Two of the methods currently being used to determine the coordinate distance to high-redshift sources are the radio galaxy method and the supernova method. These methods are similar in their dependence on the coordinate distance. Here, the radio galaxy method is briefly described and results are presented. One of the underlying assumptions of the method is explored. In addition, the method is compared and contrasted to the supernova method. The constraints imposed on global cosmological parameters by radio galaxies are consistent with those imposed by supernovae.   For a universe that is spatially flat with mean mass density $\Omega_m$ in non-relativistic matter and mean mass density 1- $\Omega_m$ in quintessence, radio galaxies alone indicate at 84 % confidence that the expansion of the universe is accelerating at the current epoch. And, independent of whether or not the universe is spatially flat, radio galaxies alone indicate at 95 % confidence that $\Omega_m$ must be less than 0.6 at the current epoch.
Supernova 1987A remains the most well-studied supernova to date. Observations produced excellent broad-band photometric and spectroscopic coverage over a wide wavelength range at all epochs. We model the observed spectra from Day 1 to Day 81 using a hydrodynamical model. We show that good agreement can be obtained at times up to about 60 days, if we allow for extended nickel mixing. Later than about 60 days the observed Balmer lines become stronger than our models can reproduce. We show that this is likely due to a more complicated distribution of gamma-rays than we allow for in our spherically symmetric calculations. We present synthetic light curves in UBVRIJHK and a synthetic bolometric light curve. Using this broad baseline of detailed spectroscopic models we find a distance modulus mu = 18.5 +/- 0.2 using the SEAM method of determining distances to supernovae. We find that the explosion time agrees with that of the neutrino burst and is constrained at 68% confidence to within +/- 0.9 days. We argue that the weak Balmer lines of our detailed model calculations casts doubt on the accuracy of the purely photometric EPM method. We also suggest that Type IIP supernovae will be most useful as distance indicators at early times due to a variety of effects.
Review article on the cosmological implications of Type Ia Supernovae for Europhysics News.
GRB 010921 was the first HETE-2 GRB to be localized via its afterglow emission. The low-redshift of the host galaxy, z=0.451, prompted us to undertake intensive multi-color observations with the Hubble Space Telescope with the goal of searching for an underlying supernova component. We do not detect any coincident supernova to a limit 1.34 mag fainter than SN 1998bw at 99.7% confidence, making this one of the most sensitive searches for an underlying SN. Analysis of the afterglow data allow us to infer that the GRB was situated behind a net extinction (Milky Way and the host galaxy) of A_V ~ 1.8 mag in the observer frame. Thus, had it not been for such heavy extinction our data would have allowed us to probe for an underlying SN with brightness approaching those of more typical Type Ib/c supernovae.
A primary goal for cosmology and particle physics over the coming decade will be to unravel the nature of the dark energy that drives the accelerated expansion of the Universe. In particular, determination of the equation-of-state of dark energy, w equivalent p/rho, and its time variation, dw/dz, will be critical for developing theoretical understanding of the new physics behind this phenomenon. Type Ia supernovae (SNe) and cosmic microwave background (CMB) anisotropy are each sensitive to the dark energy equation-of-state. SNe alone can determine w(z) with some precision, while CMB anisotropy alone cannot because of a strong degeneracy between the matter density Omega_M and w. However, we show that the Planck CMB mission can significantly improve the power of a deep SNe survey to probe w and especially dw/dz. Because CMB constraints are nearly orthogonal to SNe constraints in the Omega_M-w plane, for constraining w(z) Planck is more useful than precise determination of Omega_M. We discuss how the CMB/SNe complementarity impacts strategies for the redshift distribution of a supernova survey to determine w(z) and conclude that a well-designed sample should include a substantial number of supernovae out to redshifts z ~ 2.
From Hubble Space Telescope images with 0.05" resolution we identify four stars brighter than V=25 mag within 2.5" of SN 1993J in M81 which contaminated previous ground-based brightness estimates for the supernova progenitor. Correcting for the contamination, we find that the energy distribution of the progenitor is consistent with that of an early K-type supergiant star with M_V \~ -7.0 +/- 0.4 mag and an initial mass of 13--22 Msun. The brightnesses of the nearby stars are sufficient to account for the excess blue light seen from the ground in pre-explosion observations. Therefore, the SN 1993J progenitor did not necessarily have a blue companion, although by 2001, fainter blue stars are seen in close proximity to the supernova. These observations do not strongly limit the mass of a hypothetical companion. A blue dwarf star with a mass up to 30 Msun could have been orbiting the progenitor without being detected in the ground-based images. Explosion models and observations show that the SN 1993J progenitor had a helium-rich envelope. To test whether the helium abundance could influence the energy distribution of the progenitor, we calculated model supergiant atmospheres with a range of plausible helium abundances. The models show that the pre-supernova colors are not strongly affected by the helium abundance longward of 4000 A, and abundances ranging between solar and 90% helium (by number) are all consistent with the observations.
We study the mixing of chemical species in the interstellar medium (ISM). Recent observations suggest that the distribution of species such as deuterium in the ISM may be far from homogeneous. This raises the question of how long it takes for inhomogeneities to be erased in the ISM, and how this depends on the length scale of the inhomogeneities. We added a tracer field to the three-dimensional, supernova-driven ISM model of Avillez (2000) to study mixing and dispersal in kiloparsec-scale simulations of the ISM with different supernova (SN) rates and different inhomogeneity length scales. We find several surprising results. Classical mixing length theory fails to predict the very weak dependence of mixing time on length scale that we find on scales of 25--500 pc. Derived diffusion coefficients increase exponentially with time, rather than remaining constant. The variance of composition declines exponentially, with a time constant of tens of Myr, so that large differences fade faster than small ones. The time constant depends on the inverse square root of the supernova rate. One major reason for these results is that even with numerical diffusion exceeding physical values, gas does not mix quickly between hot and cold regions.
We investigate the impact of an early population of massive stars on their surroundings. Dissociation of molecular hydrogen by strong UV emission from such stars is expected to produce a global transition in the cooling mechanism of minihalos at a redshift of approximately 30, strongly inhibiting star formation until more massive halos can collapse. Furthermore, chemical enrichment from Pop III supernovae produces a second transition at z ~ 15-20, when the mean metallicity of the universe exceeds a critical threshold and Pop III star formation gives way to Pop II. We show that observations of high redshift supernovae with the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST) have the potential to trace the cosmic star formation rate out to z >~ 20, provided that Pop III supernovae are at least as bright as, and ideally brighter than, type Ia supernovae. We also propose a mechanism for the formation of a novel population of extremely low metallicity stars of intermediate mass at very high redshifts, which we term Pop II.5. In our model shock compression, heating, and subsequent cooling to high density reduces the fragment mass in primordial gas to ~10 M_sun, allowing low mass stars to form. We predict the number density of relic Pop II.5 stars in the Milky Way halo today and find that, with certain assumptions, there should be ~ 10 kpc^{-3} in the solar neighborhood.
The X-ray Multi-Mirror Mission XMM-Newton is ESA's largest observatory so far; it is dedicated to explore the Universe in the 0.2 - 15 keV X-ray band of the electromagnetic spectrum. Because of its large collecting area very faint sources not accessible before can be observed and it is therefore the long awaited instrument to study young pulsars and neutron stars in supernova remnants, cooling neutron stars and millisecond pulsars at X-ray energies. The high throughput of the instruments, which all are operated simultaneously, provide high resolution spectral, spatial and temporal information from a source during a single observation and make XMM-Newton unique and best suited for pulsar studies. In this article we briefly describe the instrument capabilities useful for pulsar observations and provide information on the timing accuracy on the relative and absolute scale. We further provide scientific results from observations of the Crab-pulsar, PSR J1617-5055 near RCW 103, of young neutron stars in the supernova remnants RX J0852-4622, Puppis-A and RCW 103 including 1E161348-5055.1 which is identified to be the second binary in a supernova remnant. In addition we report on observations of the cooling neutron star PSR B1055-52 and on the millisecond pulsar PSR J0030+0451 which all were observed by XMM-Newton during the first two years of scientific operation.
We review the characteristics of nucleosynthesis in 'Hypernovae', i.e., core-collapse supernovae with very large explosion energies ($ \gsim 10^{52} $ ergs). The hypernova yields show the following characteristics: 1) The mass ratio between the complete and incomplete Si burning regions is larger in hypernovae than normal supernovae. As a result, higher energy explosions tend to produce larger [(Zn, Co, V)/Fe] and smaller [(Mn, Cr)/Fe], which could explain the trend observed in very metal-poor stars. 2) Because of enhanced $\alpha$-rich freezeout, $^{44}$Ca, $^{48}$Ti, and $^{64}$Zn are produced more abundantly than in normal supernovae. The large [(Ti, Zn)/Fe] ratios observed in very metal poor stars strongly suggest a significant contribution of hypernovae. 3) Oxygen burning takes place in more extended regions in hypernovae to synthesize a larger amount of Si, S, Ar, and Ca ("Si"), which makes the "Si"/O ratio larger. The abundance pattern of the starburst galaxy M82 may be attributed to hypernova explosions. We thus suggest that hypernovae make important contribution to the early Galactic (and cosmic) chemical evolution.
A long-standing problem in supernova physics is how to measure the total energy and temperature of $\nu_\mu$, $\nu_\tau$, $\bar{\nu}_\mu$, and $\bar{\nu}_\tau$. While of the highest importance, this is very difficult because these flavors only have neutral-current detector interactions. We propose that neutrino-proton elastic scattering, $\nu + p \to \nu + p$, can be used for the detection of supernova neutrinos in scintillator detectors. It should be emphasized immediately that the dominant signal is on {\it free} protons. Though the proton recoil kinetic energy spectrum is soft, with $T_p \simeq 2 E_\nu^2/M_p$, and the scintillation light output from slow, heavily ionizing protons is quenched, the yield above a realistic threshold is nearly as large as that from $\bar{\nu}_e + p \to e^+ + n$. In addition, the measured proton spectrum is related to the incident neutrino spectrum. The ability to detect this signal would give detectors like KamLAND and Borexino a crucial and unique role in the quest to detect supernova neutrinos. These results are now published: J. F. Beacom, W. M. Farr and P. Vogel, Phys. Rev. D {\bf 66}, 033001 (2002) [arXiv:hep-ph/0205220]; the details are given there.
Braneworld models of dark energy are examined in the light of observations of high redshift type Ia supernovae. Braneworld models admit several novel and even exotic possibilities which include: (i) The effective equation of state of dark energy can be more negative than in LCDM: $w \leq -1$; (ii) A class of braneworld models can encounter a `quiescent' future singularity at which the energy density and the Hubble parameter remain well behaved, but higher derivatives of the expansion factor ($\stackrel{..}{a}$, $\stackrel{...}{a}$ etc.) diverge when the future singularity is reached; (iii) The current acceleration of the universe is a {\em transient feature} in a class of models in which dark energy `disappears' after a certain time, giving rise to a matter dominated universe in the future. Since horizons are absent in such a space-time, a braneworld model with {\em transient acceleration} might help reconcile current supernova-based observations of an accelerating universe with the demands of string/M-theory. A maximum likelihood analysis reveals that braneworld models satisfy the stringent demands imposed by high redshift supernovae and a large region in parameter space agrees marginally better with current observations than LCDM. For instance, models with $w < -1 (> -1)$ provide better agreement with data than LCDM for $\Omega_m \ggeq 0.3 (\lleq 0.25)$.
The SuperNova / Acceleration Probe (SNAP) is a space-based experiment to measure the expansion history of the Universe and study both its dark energy and the dark matter. The experiment is motivated by the startling discovery that the expansion of the Universe is accelerating. A 0.7 square-degree imager comprised of 36 large format fully-depleted n-type CCD's sharing a focal plane with 36 HgCdTe detectors forms the heart of SNAP, allowing discovery and lightcurve measurements simultaneously for many supernovae. The imager and a high-efficiency low-resolution integral field spectrograph are coupled to a 2-m three mirror anastigmat wide-field telescope, which will be placed in a high-earth orbit. The SNAP mission can obtain high-signal-to-noise calibrated light-curves and spectra for over 2000 Type Ia supernovae at redshifts between z=0.1 and 1.7. The resulting data set can not only determine the amount of dark energy with high precision, but test the nature of the dark energy by examining its equation of state. In particular, dark energy due to a cosmological constant can be differentiated from alternatives such as "quintessence", by measuring the dark energy's equation of state to an accuracy of +/-0.05, and by studying its time dependence.
We discuss the future evolution of the universe in the light of recent observations. The apparent luminosity vs. redshift of supernovae favor an accelerating universe. However an Einstein-de Sitter critical universe should not be ruled out yet.
Spectroscopic analyses with the intention of the interpretation of the UV-spectra of the brightest stars as individuals - supernovae - or as components of star-forming regions - massive O stars - provide a powerful tool with great astrophysical potential for the determination of extragalactic distances and of the chemical composition of star-forming galaxies even at high redshifts.   The perspectives of already initiated work with the new generation of tools for quantitative UV-spectroscopy of Hot Stars that have been developed during the last two decades are presented and the status of the continuing effort to construct corresponding models for Hot Star atmospheres is reviewed.   Because the physics of the atmospheres of Hot Stars are strongly affected by velocity expansion dominating the spectra at all wavelength ranges, hydrodynamic model atmospheres for O-type stars and explosion models for Supernovae of Type Ia are necessary as basis for the synthesis and analysis of the spectra. It is shown that stellar parameters, abundances and stellar wind properties can be determined by the methods of spectral diagnostics already developed. Additionally, it will be demonstrated that models and synthetic spectra of Type Ia Supernovae of required quality are already available that make it possible to tackle the question of whether Supernovae Ia are standard candles in a cosmological sense and the SN-luminosity distances thus indicate accelerated expansion of the universe.
New observations of Cosmic Microwave Background Anisotropies, Supernovae luminosity distances and Galaxy Clustering are sharpening our knowledge about dark energy. Here we present the latest constraints.
Current cosmological observations show a strong signature of the existence of a dark energy component with negative pressure. The most obvious candidate for this dark energy is the cosmological constant (with the equation of state w_X=p/\rho=-1), which, however, raises several theoretical difficulties. This has led to models for dark energy component which evolves with time. We discuss certain questions related to the determination of the nature of dark energy component from observations of high redshift supernova. The main results of our analysis are: (i) Even if the precise value of w_X is known from observations, it is not possible to determine the nature of the unknown dark energy source using only kinematical and geometrical measurements. We have given explicit examples to show that different types of sources can give rise to a given w_X. (ii) Although the full data set of supernova observations (which are currently available) strongly rule out models without dark energy, the high (z>0.25) and low (z<0.25) redshift data sets, individually, admit decelerating models with zero dark energy. Any possible evolution in the absolute magnitude of the supernovae, if detected, might allow the decelerating models to be consistent with the data. (iii) We have introduced two parameters, which can be obtained entirely from theory, to study the sensitivity of the luminosity distance on w_X. Using these two parameters, we have argued that although one can determine the present value of w_X accurately from the data, one cannot constrain the evolution of w_X.
The hydrodynamical modelling of Type II plateau supernova light curves predicts a correlation between three observable parameters (the plateau duration, the absolute magnitude and photospheric velocity at the middle of the plateau) on the one side and three physical parameters (the explosion energy E, the mass of the envelope expelled M, and the presupernova radius R) on the other side. The correlation is used, together with adopted EPM distances, to estimate E, M, and R for a dozen of well-observed SNe IIP. For this set of supernovae, the resulting value of E varies within a factor of 6 [0.5< E/(10^51 erg)<3], whereas the envelope mass remains within the limits 10< M/M_sun <30. The presupernova radius is typically (200-600)R_sun, but can exceed 1000R_sun for the brightest supernovae (e.g., SN 1992am).   A new method of determining the distance of SNe IIP is proposed. It is based on the assumption of a correlation between the explosion energy E and the Ni56 mass required to power the post-plateau light curve tail through Co56 decay. The method is useful for SNe IIP with well-observed bolometric light curves both during the plateau and radioactive tail phases. The resulting distances and future improvements are discussed.
An analytical model for a turbulent clumpy gas disk is presented where turbulence is maintained by the energy input due to supernovae. Expressions for the disk parameters, global filling factors, molecular fractions, and star formation rates are given as functions of the Toomre parameter $Q$, the ratio between the cloud size and the turbulent driving length scale $\delta$, the mass accretion rate within the disk $\dot{M}$, the constant of molecule formation $\alpha$, the disk radius, the angular velocity, and its radial derivative. Two different cases are investigated: a dominating stellar disk and a self-gravitating gas disk in $z$ direction. The turbulent driving wavelength is determined in a first approach by energy flux conservation, i.e. the supernovae energy input is transported by turbulence to smaller scales where it is dissipated. The results are compared to those of a fully gravitational model. For Q=1 and $\delta=1$ both models are consistent with each other. In a second approach the driving length scale is directly determined by the size of supernovae remnants. Both models are applied to the Galaxy and can reproduce its integrated and local gas properties. The influence of thermal and magnetic pressure on the disk structure is investigated. We infer $Q \sim 1$ and $\dot{M} \sim 0.05 - 0.1 M_{\odot} yr ^{-1}$ for the Galaxy.
We report the results of a coherent study of three chemically anomalous metal-poor ([Fe/H] ~ -2) stars. These objects exhibit unusually low abundances of Mg, Si, Ca (alpha-elements) and Sr, Y, and Ba (neutron-capture elements). Our analyses confirm and expand upon earlier reports of atypical abundances in BD+80~245, G4-36, and CS22966-043. We also find that the latter two stars exhibit enhanced abundances of Cr, Mn, Ni, and Zn (iron-peak elements), along with what appears to be large abundances of Ga, with respect to the abundance of iron. Comparing the chemical abundances of these stars to supernova model yields, we derive supernovae ratios of Type Ia versus Type II events in the range of 0.6 <= (N_Ia/N_II) <= 1.3. Whereas, for the Sun, we derive supernovae ratios in good agreement with those found in the literature: 0.18 +/- 0.01 < (N_Ia/N_II)_sun < 0.25 +/- 0.06. Given the relatively low metallicity and high (N_Ia/N_II) ratios of the low-alpha stars studied here, these objects may have witnessed, or been born from material produced in the yields of the earliest supernova Type Ia events.
We apply the Bayesian concept of `evidence' to reveal systematically the nature of dark energy from present and future supernova luminosity distance measurements. We express the unknown dark energy equation of state w(z) as a low order polynomial in redshift and use evidence to find the polynomial order, thereby establishing the minimum order required by the data. We apply this method to the current supernova data, and with a prior -1 < w(z) < 1 and Omega_m = 0.3 \pm 0.05, obtain a large probability of 91% for the cosmological constant model, with the remaining 9% assigned to the two more complex models tested. We also investigate the use of evidence for future supernova data sets such as distances obtainable from surveys like the Supernova Acceleration Probe (SNAP). Given a low uncertainty on the present day matter density we find that, if the underlying dark energy model is only modestly evolving, then a constant $w(z)$ fit is sufficient. However, if the evolution of the dark energy equation of state to linear order is larger than |w_1| ~ 0.5, then the evolution can be established with statistical significance. For models where we can assume the prior -1 < w(z) < 1, the correct polynomial order can be established even for modestly evolving equations of state.
We used one-dimensional radiative-transport radiation hydrodynamical (RHD) simulations to investigate the formation of clumping in freely-expanding supernova ejecta due to the radioactive heating from the Ni56 -> Co56 -> Fe56 decay sequence. The heating gives rise to an inflated Nickel bubble, which induces a forward shock that compresses the outer ambient gas into a shell. The radiative energy deposited by the radioactivity leaks out across the shock by radiative diffusion, and we investigate its effect on the evolution of the ejecta structure. Compared to the hydrodynamical adiabatic approximation with gamma =4/3, the preshock gas becomes accelerated by the radiation outflow. The shock is thus weakened and the shell becomes broader and less dense. The thickness of the shell takes up <~ 4 % of the radius of the bubble, and the structure of the shell can be approximately described by a self-similar solution. We compared the properties of the shell components with those of the ejecta clumps indicated by our previous hydrodynamical simulations for the later interaction of clumps with the outer supernova remnant. The high density contrast across the shell, chi ~ 100, is compatible with that of ejecta clumps as indicated for Tycho's knots, but there is insufficient dense gas to cause a pronounced protrusion on the outline of a core collapse supernova remnant, like the bullets in the Vela remnant.
Based on an extensive grid of stellar models between 13 and 25 Mo and a wide range of metallicities, we have studied the light curves of core collapse supernovae, their application to cosmology and evolutionary effects with redshift. The direct link between the hydro and radiation transport allows to calculate monochromatic light curves.   With decreasing metallicity Z and increasing mass, progenitors tend to explode as compact Blue Supergiants and produce sub-luminous supernovae that are about 1.5 mag dimmer compared to "normal" SNe II with Red   Supergiant progenitors (RSGs). Progenitors with small masses tend to explode as RSGs even at low Z. The consequences are obvious for probing the chemical evolution, namely, a strong bias when using the statistics of core collapse supernovae to probe the history of star formation.   Our study is limited in scope with respect to the explosion energies and the production of radioactive Ni. Within the class of "extreme SNe II-P" supernovae, the light curves are rather insensitive with respect to the progenitor mass and explosion energy compared to analytic models which are based on parameterized stellar structures. We expect a wider range of brightness due to variations in Ni56 because radioactive energy is a main source of luminosity.   However, the overall insensitivity of LCs may allow their use as quasi-standard candles for distance determination.
A key question for supernova cosmology is whether the peak luminosities of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) are sufficiently free from the effects of cosmic and galactic evolution. To answer this question, we review the currently popular scenario of SN Ia progenitors, i.e., the single degenerate scenario for the Chandrasekhar mass white dwarf (WD) models. We identify the progenitor's evolution with two channels: (1) the WD+RG (red-giant) and (2) the WD+MS (near main-sequence He-rich star) channels. The strong wind from accreting WDs plays a key role, which yields important age and metallicity effects on the evolution.   We suggest that the variation of the carbon mass fraction $X$(C) in the C+O WD (or the variation of the initial WD mass) causes the diversity of SN Ia brightness. This model can explain the observed dependence of SNe Ia brightness on the galaxy types. We then predict how SN Ia brightness evolves along the redshift (with changing metallicity and age) for elliptical and spiral galaxies. Such evolutionary effects along the redshift can be corrected as has been made for local SNe Ia.   We also touch on several related issues: (1) the abundance pattern of stars in dwarf spheroidal galaxies in relation to the metallicity effect on SNe Ia, (2) effects of angular momentum brought into the WD in relation to the diversities and the fate of double degenerates, and (3) possible presence of helium in the peculiar SN Ia 2000cx in relation to the sub-Chandrasekhar mass model.
We report on the results of our monitoring program of the X-ray remnant of supernova 1987A with the {\it Chandra X-Ray Observatory}. We have performed two new observations during the {\it Chandra} Cycle 3 period, bringing the total to six monitoring observations over the past three years. These six observations provide a detailed time history of the birth of a new supernova remnant in X-rays. The high angular resolution images indicate that soft X-ray bright knots are associated with the optical spots, while hard X-ray features are better correlated with radio images. We interpret this in terms of a model in which fast shocks propagating through the circumstellar HII region produce the hard X-ray and radio emission, while the soft X-ray and optical emission arise in slower shocks entering into dense knots in the circumstellar inner ring. New observations begin to show changes in the morphology that may herald a new stage in the development of this incipient supernova remnant. The observed X-ray fluxes increase by nearly a factor of three over the last 30 months. The X-ray remnant is expanding at a velocity of $\sim$5000 km s$^{-1}$.
We present the average abundances of the intermediate elements obtained by performing a stacked analysis of all the galaxy clusters in the archive of the X-ray telescope ASCA. We determine the abundances of Fe, Si, S, and Ni as a function of cluster temperature (mass) from 1--10 keV, and place strong upper limits on the abundances of Ca and Ar. In general, Si and Ni are overabundant with respect to Fe, while Ar and Ca are very underabundant. The discrepancy between the abundances of Si, S, Ar, and Ca indicate that the alpha-elements do not behave homogeneously as a single group. We show that the abundances of the most well-determined elements Fe, Si, and S in conjunction with recent theoretical supernovae yields do not give a consistent solution for the fraction of material produced by Type Ia and Type II supernovae at any temperature or mass. The general trend is for higher temperature clusters to have more of their metals produced in Type II supernovae than in Type Ias. The inconsistency of our results with abundances in the Milky Way indicate that spiral galaxies are not the dominant metal contributors to the intracluster medium (ICM). The pattern of elemental abundances requires an additional source of metals beyond standard SNIa and SNII enrichment. The properties of this new source are well matched to those of Type II supernovae with very massive, metal-poor progenitor stars. These results are consistent with a significant fraction of the ICM metals produced by an early generation of population III stars.
In this paper we present spectroscopic and photometric observations for four core collapse supernovae (SNe), namely SNe 1994N, 1999br, 1999eu and 2001dc. Together with SN 1997D, we show that they form a group of exceptionally low-luminosity events. These SNe have narrow spectral lines (indicating low expansion velocities) and low luminosities at every phase (significantly lower than those of typical core-collapse supernovae). The very low luminosity during the ^{56}Co radioactive decay tail indicates that the mass of ^{56}Ni ejected during the explosion is much smaller (M(Ni) ~ 2-8 x 10^{-3} Mo) than the average (M(Ni) ~ 6-10 x 10^{-2} Mo). Two supernovae of this group (SN 1999br and SN 2001dc) were discovered very close to the explosion epoch, allowing us to determine the lengths of their plateaux (~ 100 days) as well as establishiing the explosion epochs of the other, less-completely observed SNe. It is likely that this group of SNe represent the extreme low-luminosity tail of a single continuous distribution of SN II-P events. Their kinetic energy is also exceptionally low. Although an origin from low mass progenitors has also been proposed for low-luminosity core-collapse SNe, recent work provides evidence in favour of the high mass progenitor scenario. The incidence of these low--luminosity SNe could be as high as 4-5$ $ of all type II SNe.
The identification of type Ib/c supernovae as GRB progenitors is motivated by the association of GRB980425 with SN1998bw and of GRB030329 with SN2003dh. While the gamma-ray luminosity of GRB030329 was typical to cosmological GRBs, the luminosity of the nearby (40 Mpc) GRB980425 was ~5 orders of magnitude lower. The large luminosity difference is commonly explained by hypothesizing that either SNe Ib/c produce two different classes of GRBs, or that GRB980425 was a typical cosmological GRB jet viewed off-axis. In the latter scenario, strong radio emission, ~10^{30} erg/s Hz, is expected at ~1 yr delay due to jet deceleration to sub-relativistic speed, as observed from GRB970508. The radio luminosity of SN1998bw was 3 orders of magnitude lower than this value. We show that the low radio flux may be consistent with the off-axis jet interpretation, if the density of the wind surrounding the progenitor is lower than typically expected, \dot{m}=(\dot{M}/10^{-5} M_sun/yr)/(v/10^3 km/s)~0.1 instead of \dot{m}>=1. The lower value of \dot{m} is consistent with the observed radio emission from the supernova shock driven into the wind. This interpretation predicts transition to sub-relativistic expansion at ~10 yr delay, with current \~1 mJy 10GHz flux and m_V~23 optical flux, and with ~10 mas angular source size. It also implies that in order to search for the signature of off-axis GRBs associated with nearby Ib/c supernovae, follow up observations should be carried on a multi-yr time scale.
I present a model of a pulsar wind interacting with its associated supernova remnant. I will use the model to argue that one can explain the morphology of the pulsar wind nebula inside N157B, a supernova remnant in the Large Magellanic Cloud, without the need for a bow shock interpretation. The model uses a hydrodynamics code which simulates the evolution of a pulsar wind nebula, when the pulsar is moving at a high velocity (1000 km/sec) through the expanding supernova remnant. The simulation shows three different stages of the pulsar wind nebula: the supersonic expansion stage, the subsonic expansion stage and the bow shock stage. The last stage occurs when the head of the pulsar wind nebula, containing the active pulsar, deforms into a bow shock, due to the motion of the pulsar becoming supersonic. I will argue that the pulsar wind nebula inside N157B is currently in the second stage of its evolution, i.e. the expansion of the pulsar wind nebula is subsonic and there is no bow shock around the pulsar wind bubble. The strongly off-centered position of the pulsar with respect to its pulsar wind nebula is naturally explained by the result of the interaction of the reverse shock with the pulsar wind nebula, as the simulation bears out.
We present near infrared photometry of the Type Ia supernova 1999ee; also, optical and infrared photometry of the Type Ia SNe 2000bh, 2000ca, and 2001ba. For SNe 1999ee and 2000bh we present the first-ever SN photometry at 1.035 microns (the Y-band). We present K-corrections which transform the infrared photometry in the observer's frame to the supernova rest frame. Using our infrared K-corrections and stretch factors derived from optical photometry, we construct JHK templates which can be used to determine the apparent magnitudes at maximum if one has some data in the window -12 to +10 d with respect to T(B_max). Following up previous work on the uniformity of V minus IR loci of Type Ia supernovae of mid-range decline rates, we present unreddened loci for slow decliners. We also discuss evidence for a continuous change of color at a given epoch as a function of decline rate.
We present deep sub-millimetre observations of seventeen galaxies at z=0.5, selected through being hosts of a type 1a supernova. Two galaxies are detected directly, and the sample is detected statistically with a mean 850 micron flux of 1.01mJy +/- 0.33mJy, which is 25% - 135% higher than locally. We infer that the mean value of A_v in normal galaxies at z=0.5 is comparable to or greater than the mean A_v in local normal galaxies, in agreement with galaxy chemical evolution models and indirect observational evidence. Scaling from the local value given by Rowan-Robinson (2003) gives a mean extinction at z=0.5 of A_v = 0.56 +/- 0.17. The dust in the brightest sub-mm object in our sample is best interpreted as normal `cirrus' dust similar to that seen locally. The detection rate of our sample suggests that some sources found in blank-field sub-mm surveys may not be high redshift starbursts, but rather cirrus galaxies at moderate redshifts and with lower star formation rates. Finally, an increase in host dust extinction with redshift may impact the cosmological results from distant supernova searches. This emphasizes the need to carefully monitor dust extinction when using type Ia supernovae to measure the cosmological parameters.
We briefly review the existing database of supernova spectropolarimetry, concentrating on recent data and on results from our group's research. Spectropolarimetry provides the only direct known probe of early-time supernova geometry. To obtain reliable conclusions, however, it is very important to correctly account for interstellar polarization. We find that Type IIn supernovae (SNe IIn) tend to be highly polarized, perhaps in part because of the interaction of the ejecta with an asymmetric circumstellar medium. In contrast, SNe II-P are not polarized much, at least shortly after the explosion. At later times, however, there is evidence for increasing polarization, as one views deeper into the expanding ejecta. Moreover, core-collapse SNe that have lost part (SN IIb) or all (SN Ib) of their hydrogen (or even helium; SN Ic) layers prior to the explosion tend to show substantial polarization; thus, the deeper we probe into core-collapse events, the greater the asphericity. There is now conclusive evidence that at least some SNe Ia are intrinsically polarized, although only by a small amount. Finally, SN spectropolarimetry provides the opportunity to study the fundamental properties of the interstellar dust in external galaxies. For example, we have found evidence for extremely high polarization efficiency for the dust along the line-of-sight to SN 1999gi in NGC 3184.
(Abrigded) We report X-ray studies of the environs of SN 1998bw and GRB 980425 using the Chandra X-Ray Observatory 1281 days after the GRB. Combining our observation of the supernova with others of the GRB afterglow, a smooth X-ray light curve, spanning ~1300 days, is obtained by assuming the burst and supernova were coincident at 35.6 Mpc. When this X-ray light curve is compared with those of the X-ray ``afterglows'' of ordinary GRBs, X-ray Flashes, and ordinary supernovae, evidence emerges for at least two classes of lightcurves, perhaps bounding a continuum. By three to ten years, all these phenomena seem to converge on a common X-ray luminosity, possibly indicative of the supernova underlying them all. This convergence strengthens the conclusion that SN 1998bw and GRB 980425 took place in the same object. One possible explanation for the two classes is a (nearly) standard GRB observed at different angles, in which case X-ray afterglows with intermediate luminosities should eventually be discovered. Finally, we comment on the contribution of GRB afterglows to the ULX source population.
It has been suggested that the peculiar properties of the luminous Type Ic supernova SN 1998bw and its low-energy gamma-ray burst GRB 980425 may be understood if they originated in a standard gamma-ray burst explosion viewed far from the axis of the relativistic jet. In this scenario, strong radio emission is predicted from the jet on a timescale 1 to 10 years after the explosion as it decelerates and spreads into our line of sight. To test this hypothesis we have carried out late-time radio observations of SN 1998bw at $t=5.6$ years, yielding upper limits which are consistent with the continued fading of the supernova. We find these limits to be consistent with an off-axis jet only if the progenitor mass loss rate is $\dot{M}\lesssim 4 \times 10^{-7}$ M$_\odot$ yr$^{-1}$ (for a wind velocity $v_w=1000$ km s$^{-1}$) or the fraction of the shock energy in magnetic fields is $\epsilon_B \lesssim 10^{-3}$. These values are low relative to those inferred for cosmological GRBs. We combine the SN 1998bw measurements with existing observations for a sample of 15 local Type Ibc supernovae to estimate that at most 6% produce collimated, relativistic outflows.
Today, Type Ia supernovae are essential tools for cosmology, and recognized as major contributors to the chemical evolution of galaxies. The construction of detailed supernova progenitor models, however, was so far prevented by various physical and numerical difficulties in simulating binary systems with an accreting white dwarf component, e.g., unstable helium shell burning which may cause significant expansion and mass loss. Here, we present the first binary evolution calculation which models both stellar components and the binary interaction simultaneously, and where the white dwarf mass grows up to the Chandrasekhar limit by mass accretion. Our model starts with a 1.6 Msun helium star and a 1.0 Msun CO white dwarf in a 0.124 day orbit. Thermally unstable mass transfer starts when the CO core of the helium star reaches 0.53 Msun, with mass transfer rates of 1...8 times 10^{-6} Msun/yr. The white dwarf burns the accreted helium steadily until the white dwarf mass has reached ~ 1.3 Msun and weak thermal pulses follow until carbon ignites in the center when the white dwarf reaches 1.37 Msun. Although the supernova production rate through this channel is not well known, and this channel can not be the only one as its progenitor life time is rather short (~ 10^7 - 10^8 yr), our results indicate that helium star plus white dwarf systems form a reliable route for producing Type Ia supernovae.
We investigate chemical evolution in Milky Way-like galaxies based on the cold dark matter model in which cosmic structures form via hierarchical merging. We introduce chemical enrichment due to type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) into the Mitaka semi-analytic galaxy formation model developed by Nagashima & Yoshii. For the first time we derive distributions of stellar metallicities and their ratios in Milky Way-like galaxies treating chemical enrichment due to SNe Ia in a hierarchical galaxy formation model self-consistently. As a first attempt, we assume all SNe Ia to have the same lifetime, and assume instantaneous recycling for type II supernovae (SNe II). We find that our model reproduces well the metal abundance ratio [O/Fe] against [Fe/H] and the {iron metallicity distribution function} in the solar neighborhood. This means that the so-called G-dwarf problem is resolved by the hierarchical formation of galaxies, and a gas infall term introduced in traditional monolithic collapse models to solve this problem is well explained by the mixture of some physical processes such as hierarchical merging of dark halos, gas cooling, energy feedback and injection of gas and metals into hot gas due to supernovae. Our model predicts more oxygen-enhanced stars in bulges at [Fe/H] $\simeq 0$ than in disks. This trend seems to be supported by recent observations while they have still uncertainties. More data in number and accuracy will provide independent and important constraints on galaxy formation. (abridged)
We present a numerical investigation of the development of Rayleigh-Taylor instability at the interface between an expanding Pulsar Wind Nebula and its surrounding Supernova Remnant. These systems have long been thought to be naturally subject to this kind of instability, given their expansion behavior and the density jump at the contact discontinuity. High resolution images of the Crab Nebula at optical frequencies show the presence of a complex network of line-emitting filaments protruding inside the synchrotron nebula. These structures are interpreted as the observational evidence that Rayleigh-Taylor instability is in fact at work. The development of this instability in the regime appropriate to describe Supernova Remnant-Pulsar Wind Nebula systems is non-trivial. The conditions at the interface are likely close to the stability threshold, and the inclusion of the nebular magnetic field, which might play an important role in stabilizing the system, is essential to the modeling. If Rayleigh-Taylor features can grow efficiently a mixing layer in the outer portion of the nebula might form where most of the supernova material is confined. When a magnetic field close to equipartition is included we find that the interface is stable, and that even a weaker magnetic field affects substantially the growth and shape of the fingers.
The recent report of a binary companion to the progenitor of supernova 1993J may provide important clues for identifying the nature of the nascent compact object. Given the estimates of the progenitor mass, the potential power source is probably a pulsar rather than an accreting black hole. If there is a pulsar, one would expect the rotational luminosity to be stored and reprocessed by the supernova remnant, but no pulsar nebula has yet been seen. The lack of detection of an X-ray synchrotron nebula should be taken as strong evidence against the presence of a bright pulsar. This is because absorption by the surrounding supernova gas should be negligible for the light of the companion star to have been detected. A model is developed here for the luminosity of the pulsar nebula in SN 1993J, which is then used to predict the spin-down power of the putative pulsar. If one exists, it can be providing no more than about 6 x 10^{39} erg/s. With an initial rotation period of 10-30 ms, as extrapolated from young galactic pulsars, the nascent neutron star can have either a weak magnetic field, B < 10^{11} G, or one so strong, B > 10^{15} G, that its spin was rapidly slowed down. The companion star, if bound to the neutron star, should provide ample targets for the pulsar wind to interact and produce high-energy gamma-rays. The expected non-pulsed, GeV signal is calculated; it could be detected by current and future experiments provided that the pulsar wind velocity is similar to that of the Crab Nebula.
A few seconds after bounce in a core-collapse supernova, the shock wave passes the density region corresponding to resonant neutrino oscillations with the ``atmospheric'' neutrino mass difference. The transient violation of the adiabaticity condition manifests itself in an observable modulation of the neutrino signal from a future galactic supernova. In addition to the shock wave propagation effects that were previously studied, a reverse shock forms when the supersonically expanding neutrino-driven wind collides with the slower earlier supernova ejecta. This implies that for some period the neutrinos pass two subsequent density discontinuities, giving rise to a ``double dip'' feature in the average neutrino energy as a function of time. We study this effect both analytically and numerically and find that it allows one to trace the positions of the forward and reverse shocks. We show that the energy dependent neutrino conversion probabilities allow one to detect oscillations even if the energy spectra of different neutrino flavors are the same as long as the fluxes differ. These features are observable in the \bar\nu_e signal for an inverted and in the \nu_e signal for a normal neutrino mass hierarchy, provided the 13-mixing angle is ``large'' (sin^2\theta_{13}\gg 10^{-5}).
High resolution millimeter-wave and near-infrared observations of the supernova remnants W28 and W44 reveal extensive shocked molecular gas where supernova blast waves are propagating into giant molecular clouds. New CO observations were carried out with the IRAM 30-m and ARO 12-m telescopes, and the near-infrared observations were with Palomar 200-inch telescope. The near-infrared observations reveal shocked H2 emission from both supernova remnants, showing intricate networks of filaments on arcsec scales, following the bright ridges of the radio shells. The CO and CS linewidths, indicative of the shock speed, are 20-30 km/s. Both the near-infrared and millimeter-wave emission are attributed to shocks into gas with density >1e3 cm-3. Individual shock structures are resolved in the H2 emission, with inferred edge-on shock thickness ~1e17 cm, consistent with non-dissociative shocks into gas densities of 1e3-1e4 cm-3. Bright 1720 MHz OH masers are located within the shocked H2 gas complexes and highlight only localized areas where the conditions for masing are optimal. The Halpha and X-ray emission, have morphologies very different from the radio. We find a detailed correlation of the radio and H2 emission for some long filaments, indicating cosmic ray acceleration or re-acceleration due to the shocks into moderately dense gas. The different morphologies of these two remnants at different wavelengths is explained by a highly nonuniform structure for giant molecular clouds.
In this paper we address the theory of Type Ia supernovae from the moment of carbon runaway up to several hours after the explosion. We have concentrated on the boiling-pot model: a deflagration characterized by the (nearly-) simultaneous ignition of a number of bubbles that pervade the core of the white dwarf. Thermal fluctuations larger than >1% of the background temperature (7x10^8 K) on lengthscales of < 1m could be the seeds of the bubbles. Variations of the homogeneity of the temperature perturbations can lead to two alternative configurations at carbon runaway: if the thermal gradient is small, all the bubbles grow to a common characteristic size related to the value of the thermal gradient, but if the thermal gradient is large enough, the size spectrum of the bubbles extends over several orders of magnitude. The explosion phase has been studied with the aid of a smoothed particle hydrodynamics code suited to simulate thermonuclear supernovae. In spite of important procedural differences and different physical assumptions, our results converge with the most recent calculations of 3D deflagrations in white dwarfs carried out in supernova studies by different groups. For large initial numbers of bubbles (>3-4 per octant), the explosion produces about 0.45 solar masses of 56Ni, and the kinetic energy of the ejecta is 0.45x10^{51} ergs. However, all three-dimensional deflagration models share three main drawbacks: 1) the scarce synthesis of intermediate-mass elements, 2) the loss of chemical stratification of the ejecta due to mixing by Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities during the first second of the explosion, and 3) the presence of big clumps of 56Ni at the photosphere at the time of maximum brightness.
UBVRI photometry and optical spectra of type Ia supernova SN 2003du obtained at the Indian Astronomical Observatory for nearly a year since discovery are presented.   The apparent magnitude at maximum was B=13.53 +/- 0.02 mag, and the colour (B-V) = -0.08 +/- 0.03 mag. The luminosity decline rate, Delta(m_{15}(B)) = 1.04 +/- 0.04 mag indicates an absolute B magnitude at maximum of M_B = -19.34 +/- 0.3 mag and the distance modulus to the parent galaxy as mu=32.89 +/- 0.4.The light curve shapes are similar, though not identical, to those of SNe 1998bu and 1990N, both of which had luminosity decline rates similar to that of SN 2003du and occurred in spiral galaxies. The peak bolometric luminosity indicates that 0.9 Msun mass of 56Ni was ejected by the supernova. The spectral evolution and the evolution of the Si II and Ca II absorption velocities closely follows that of SN 1998bu, and in general, is within the scatter of the velocities observed in normal type Ia supernovae.   The spectroscopic and photometric behaviour of SN 2003du is quite typical for SNe Ia in spirals.   A high velocity absorption component in the Ca II (H & K) and IR-triplet features, with absorption velocities of ~20,000 km/s and ~22,000 km/s respectively, is detected in the pre-maximum spectra of days -11 and -7.
We use a new technique to extract the spectrum of a supernova from that of the contaminating background of its host galaxy, and apply it to the specific case of high-redshift Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) spectroscopy. The algorithm is based on a two-channel iterative technique employing the Richardson-Lucy restoration method and is implemented in the IRAF code 'specinholucy'. We run the code both on simulated (SN Ia at z=0.5 embedded in a bright host galaxy) and observed (SNe Ia at various phases up to z=0.236) data taken with VLT+FORS1 and show the advantages of using such a deconvolution technique in comparison with less elaborate methods. This paper is motivated by the need for optimal supernova spectroscopic data reduction in order to make meaningful comparisons between the low and high-redshift SN Ia samples. This may reveal subtle evolutionary and systematic effects that could depend on redshift and bias the cosmological results derived from comparisons of local and high-z SNe Ia in recent years. We describe the various aspects of the extraction in some detail as guidelines for the first-time user and present an optimal observing strategy for successful implementation of this method in future high-z SN Ia spectroscopic follow-up programmes.
As a first step to a more complete understanding of the local physical processes which determine star formation rates (SFRs) in the interstellar medium (ISM), we have performed controlled numerical experiments consisting of hydrodynamical simulations of a kilo-parsec scale, periodic, highly supersonic and "turbulent" three-dimensional flow. Using simple but physically motivated recipes for identifying star forming regions, we convert gas into stars which we follow self-consistently as they impact their surroundings through supernovae and stellar winds. We investigate how various processes (turbulence, radiative cooling, self-gravity, and supernovae feedback) structure the ISM, determine its energetics, and consequently affect its SFR. We find that the one-point statistical measurement captured by the probability density function (PDF) is sensitive to the simulated physics. Aside from its effect on the density structure of the medium, including self-gravity and/or supernovae feedback changes the dynamics of the medium by halting the decay of the kinetic energy. Since we find that the SFR depends most strongly on the underlying velocity field, the SFR declines in the runs lacking a means to sustain the kinetic energy, and the subsequent high density constrasts. This strong dependence on the gas velocity dispersion is in agreement with Silk's formula for the SFR (Silk 2001) which also takes the hot gas porosity, and the average gas density as important parameters. Measuring the porosity of the hot gas for the runs with supernovae feedback, we compare Silk's model for the SFR to our measured SFR and find agreement to better than a factor two.
The stellar initial mass function (IMF) integrated over an entire galaxy is an integral over all separate star-formation events. Since most stars form in star clusters with different masses the integrated IMF becomes an integral of the (universal or invariant) canonical stellar IMF over the star-cluster mass function. This integrated IMF is steeper (contains fewer massive stars per G-type star) than the canonical stellar IMF. Furthermore, observations indicate a relation between the star-formation rate of a galaxy and the most luminous stellar cluster in it. This empirical relation can be transformed into one between the star-formation rate of a galaxy and a maximum cluster mass. The assumption that this cluster mass marks the upper end of a young-cluster mass function leads to a connection of the star-formation rate and the slope of integrated IMF for massive stars. This integrated IMF varies with the star-formation history of a galaxy. Notably, large variations of the integrated IMF are evident for dwarf galaxies. One important result is that the number of type II supernovae per star is supressed relative to that expected for a canonical IMF, and that dwarf galaxies have a supressed number of supernovae per star relative to massive galaxies. For dwarf galaxies the number of supernovae per star also varies substantially depending on the galaxy assembly history.
We present a method for measuring the cosmic expansion history H(z) in uncorrelated redshift bins, and apply it to current and simulated type Ia supernova data assuming spatial flatness. If the matter density parameter Omega_m can be accurately measured from other data, then the dark energy density history X(z)=rho_X(z)/rho_X(0) can trivially be derived from this expansion history H(z). In contrast to customary ``black box'' parameter fitting, our method is transparent and easy to interpret: the measurement of H(z)^{-1} in a redshift bin is simply a linear combination of the measured comoving distances for supernovae in that bin, making it obvious how systematic errors propagate from input to output.   We find the Riess et al. (2004) ``gold'' sample to be consistent with the ``vanilla'' concordance model where the dark energy is a cosmological constant. We compare two mission concepts for the NASA/DOE Joint Dark Energy Mission (JDEM), the Joint Efficient Dark-energy Investigation (JEDI), and the Supernova Accelaration Probe (SNAP), using simulated data including the effect of weak lensing (based on numerical simulations) and a systematic bias from K-corrections. Estimating H(z) in seven uncorrelated redshift bins, we find that both provide dramatic improvements over current data: JEDI can measure H(z) to about 10% accuracy and SNAP to 30-40% accuracy.
The progenitors of core-collapse supernovae are stars with an initial mass greater than about 8M(sun). Understanding the evolution of these stars is necessary to comprehend the evolution and differences between supernovae.   We have constructed new and unique opacity tables to increase model accuracy during the latest stages of stellar evolution. We have investigated how initial mass, initial composition and mass loss affects the progenitors and their populations. There are many prescriptions for mass loss. Different research groups use their preferred rates. We have compared 12 different prescriptions and determined which provides the best fit to observations. We use our preferred mass-loss scheme to make suggestions as to the source of the differences between supernova types from our progenitor models.   Binary evolution is considered in order to search for low luminosity SN progenitors and progenitor types not possible from single stars. Removal of the hydrogen envelope is more common and we find quite different hydrogen deficient SN progenitors. We discuss the implications of our binary models for ultra-luminous X-ray sources and gamma-ray bursts. We present an estimation of the mass distribution for black holes at various metallcities showing that massive black holes are not formed until very low metallicities. Finally we combine the single star and binary results to determine their relative populations and compare to observations. However it is not possible to draw many firm conclusions because of the uncertainty in observations to date.
Views on mechanics and cosmology by the observers of the supernova of 1572
The unexpected dimness of Type Ia supernovae at redshifts z >~ 1 has over the past 7 years been seen as an indication that the expansion of the universe is accelerating. A new model cosmology, the "fractal bubble model", has been proposed by one of us [gr-qc/0503099], based on the idea that our observed universe resides in an underdense bubble remnant from a primordial epoch of cosmic inflation, together with a new solution for averaging in an inhomogeneous universe. Although there is no cosmic acceleration, it is claimed that the luminosity distance of type Ia supernovae data will nonetheless fit the new model, since it mimics a Milne universe at low redshifts. In this paper the hypothesis is tested statistically against the available type Ia supernovae data by both chi-square and Bayesian methods. While the standard model with cosmological constant Omega_Lambda = 1-Omega_m is favoured by a Bayesian analysis with wide priors, the comparison depends strongly on the priors chosen for the density parameter, Omega_m. The fractal bubble model gives better agreement generally for Omega_m<0.2. It also gives reasonably good fits for all the range, Omega_m=0.01-0.55, allowing the possibility of a viable cosmology with just baryonic matter, or alternatively with both baryonic matter and additional cold dark matter.
We present the results from a {\it Hubble Space Telescope/ACS} study of the supernovae associated with gamma-ray bursts 040924 ($z=0.86$) and 041006 ($z=0.71$). We find evidence that both GRBs were associated with a SN 1998bw-like supernova dimmed by $\sim 1.5$ and $\sim 0.3$ magnitudes, respectively, making GRB 040924 the faintest GRB-associated SN ever detected. We study the luminosity dispersion in GRB/XRF-associated SNe and compare to local Type Ibc supernovae from the literature. We find significant overlap between the two samples, suggesting that GRB/XRF-associated SNe are not necessarily more luminous nor produce more $^{56}$Ni than local SNe. Based on the current (limited) datasets, we find that the two samples may share a similar $^{56}$Ni production mechanism.
We have obtained high-quality Keck optical spectra at three epochs of the Type Ia supernova 1997ex, whose redshift z is 0.361. The elapsed calendar time between the first two spectra was 24.88 d, and that between the first and third spectra was 30.95 d. In an expanding universe where 1 + z represents the factor by which space has expanded between the emission and detection of light, the amount of aging in the supernova rest frame should be a factor of 1 / (1 + z) smaller than the observed-frame aging; thus, we expect SN 1997ex to have aged 18.28 d and 22.74 d between the first epoch and the second and third epochs, respectively. The quantitative method for determining the spectral-feature age of a SN Ia, developed by Riess et al. (1997), reveals that the corresponding elapsed times in the supernova rest frame were 16.97 +/- 2.75 d and 18.01 +/- 3.14 d, respectively. This result is inconsistent with no time dilation with a significance level of 99.0%, providing evidence against "tired light" and other hypotheses in which no time dilation is expected. Moreover, the observed timescale of spectral evolution is inconsistent with that expected in the "variable mass theory." The result is within ~1 sigma of the aging expected from a universe in which redshift is produced by cosmic expansion.
We report on VLBI observations of the Type I b/c supernova 2001em, three years after the explosion. It had been suggested that SN 2001em might be a jet-driven gamma ray burst (GRB), with the jet oriented far from the line of sight so that the GRB would not be visible from earth. To test this conjecture, we determined the size of SN 2001em. It is only marginally resolved at our resolution of ~0.9 mas. The 3-sigma upper limit on the major axis angular size of the radio source was 0.59 mas (FWHM of an elliptical Gaussian), corresponding to a one-sided apparent expansion velocity of 70,000 km/s for a distance of 80 Mpc. No low-brightness jet was seen in our image to a level of 4% of the peak brightness. If we assume instead a spherical shell geometry typical of a supernova, we find the angular radius of SN 2001em was 0.17 (-0.10,+0.06) mas, implying an isotropic expansion velocity of 20,000 (-12,000, +7,000) km/s, which is comparable to the expansion velocities of supernova shells. Our observations, therefore, are not consistent with a relativistically expanding radio source in SN 2001em, but are instead consistent with a supernova shell origin of SN 2001's radio emission.
We present the spectroscopic and imaging analysis of a type IIn supernova SN 1995N observed with the Chandra X-ray observatory on 2004 March 27. We compare the spectrum obtained from our Chandra observation with that of the previous observation with ASCA in 1998. We find the presence of Neon lines in the Chandra spectrum that were not reported in the ASCA observation. We see no evidence of Iron in both epochs. The observed absorption column depth indicates an extra component over and above the galactic absorption component and is possibly due to a cool dense shell between the reverse-shock and the contact discontinuity in the ejecta. The ASCA and the ROSAT observations suggested a non-linear behavior of the X-ray light curve. However, with the higher spatial resolution and sensitivity of Chandra, we separate out many nearby sources in the supernova field-of-view that had additionally contributed to the supernova flux due to the large Point Spread Function of the ASCA. Taking out the contribution of those nearby sources, we find that the light curves are consistent with a linear decline profile. We consider the light curve in the high energy band separately. We discuss our results in the context of models of nucleosynthesis and the interaction of the shock waves with the circumstellar medium in core collapse supernovae.
In astrophysical environments with intense neutrino fluxes, neutrino-neutrino forward scattering contributes both diagonal and off-diagonal potentials to the flavor-basis Hamiltonian that governs neutrino flavor evolution. We examine a special case where adiabatic flavor evolution can produce an off-diagonal potential from neutrino-neutrino forward scattering that dominates over both the corresponding diagonal term and the potential from neutrino-matter forward scattering. In this case, we find a solution that, unlike the ordinary Mikeyhev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein scenario, has both neutrinos and antineutrinos maximally mixed in medium over appreciable ranges of neutrino and antineutrino energy. Employing the measured solar and atmospheric neutrino mass-squared differences, we identify the conditions on neutrino fluxes that are required for this solution to exist deep in the supernova environment, where it could affect the neutrino signal, heavy-element nucleosynthesis, and even the revival of the supernova shock. We speculate on how this solution might or might not be attained in realistic supernova evolution. Though this solution is ephemeral in time and/or space in supernovae, it may signal the onset of subsequent appreciable flavor mixing for both neutrinos and antineutrinos. A similar solution may also exist in an early universe with significant net neutrino-lepton numbers.
In explaining the relative metal abundances observed in galaxy groups and clusters, it is generally assumed that all metals created by supernovae are present either in visible stars or the hot gas. We discuss here the possibility that some of the iron expelled into the hot gas by Type Ia supernovae may have radiatively cooled, avoiding detection by X-ray and optical observers. Hydrodynamic models of Type Ia explosions in the hot gas inside elliptical galaxies result in a gas of nearly pure iron that is several times hotter than the local interstellar gas. We describe the subsequent thermal evolution of the iron-rich gas as it radiates and thermally mixes with the surrounding gas. There is a critical time by which the iron ions must mix into the ambient gas to avoid rapid radiative cooling. We find that successful mixing is possible if the iron ions diffuse with large mean free paths, as in an unmagnetized plasma. However, in microgauss fields the Larmor radii of the iron ions are exceptionally small, so the field geometry must be highly tangled or radial to allow the iron to mix by diffusion faster than it cools by radiative losses. The possibility that some of the supernova iron cools cannot be easily discounted.
We present ultraviolet and optical light curves in six broadband filters and grism spectra obtained by Swift's Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope for the Type Ia supernova SN2005am. The data were collected beginning about four days before the B-band maximum, with excellent coverage of the rapid decline phase and later observations extending out to 69 days after the peak. The optical and near UV light curve match well those of SN1992A. The other UV observations constitute the first set of light curves shorter than 2500 Angstroms and allow us to compare the light curve evolution in three UV bands. The UV behavior of this and other low redshift supernovae can be used to constrain theories of progenitor evolution or to interpret optical light curves of high redshift supernovae. Using Swift's X-Ray Telescope, we also report the upper limit to SN2005am's X-ray luminosity to be 1.77 x 10^40 erg s^-1 in the 0.3--10 keV range from 58,117 s of exposure time.
We construct the Numerical Galaxy Catalog ($\nu$GC), based on a semi-analytic model of galaxy formation combined with high-resolution N-body simulations in a $\Lambda$-dominated flat cold dark matter ($\Lambda$CDM) cosmological model. The model includes several essential ingredients for galaxy formation, such as merging histories of dark halos directly taken from N-body simulations, radiative gas cooling, star formation, heating by supernova explosions (supernova feedback), mergers of galaxies, population synthesis, and extinction by internal dust and intervening HI clouds. As the first paper in a series using this model, we focus on basic photometric, structural and kinematical properties of galaxies at present and high redshifts. Two sets of model parameters are examined, strong and weak supernova feedback models, which are in good agreement with observational luminosity functions of local galaxies in a range of observational uncertainty. Both models agree well with many observations such as cold gas mass-to-stellar luminosity ratios of spiral galaxies, HI mass functions, galaxy sizes, faint galaxy number counts and photometric redshift distributions in optical pass-bands, isophotal angular sizes, and cosmic star formation rates. In particular, the strong supernova feedback model is in much better agreement with near-infrared (K'-band) faint galaxy number counts and redshift distribution than the weak feedback model and our previous semi-analytic models based on the extended Press-Schechter formalism. (Abridged)
Evidence from the WMAP polarization data indicates that the Universe may have been reionized at very high redshift. It is often suggested that the ionizing UV flux originates from an early population of massive or very massive stars. Depending on their mass, such stars can explode either as type II supernovae or pair-instability supernovae, or may entirely collapse into a black hole. The resulting neutrino emission can be quite different in each case. We consider here the relic neutrino background produced by an early burst of Population III stars coupled with a normal mode of star formation at lower redshift. The computation is performed in the framework of hierarchical structure formation and is based on cosmic star formation histories constrained to reproduce the observed star formation rate at redshift z \la 6, the observed chemical abundances in damped Lyman alpha absorbers and in the intergalactic medium, and to allow for an early reionization of the Universe at z \sim 10-20. We find that although the high redshift burst of Population III stars does lead to an appreciable flux of neutrinos at relatively low energy (E_\nu \approx 1 MeV), the observable neutrino flux is dominated by the normal mode of star formation. We also find that predicted fluxes are at the present level of the SuperK limit. As a consequence, the supernova relic neutrino background has a direct impact on models of chemical evolution and/or supernova dynamics.
The DEML316 system contains two shells, both with the characteristic signatures of supernova remnants (SNRs). We analyze Chandra and XMM-Newton data for DEML316, investigating its spatial and spectral X-ray features. Our Chandra observations resolve the structure of the northeastern SNR (Shell A) as a bright inner ring and a set of "arcs" surrounded by fainter diffuse emission. The spectrum is well fit by a thermal plasma model with temperature ~1.4 keV; we do not find significant spectral differences for different regions of this SNR. The southwestern SNR (Shell B) exhibits an irregular X-ray outline, with a brighter interior ring of emission including a bright knot of emission. Overall the emission of the SNR is well described by a thermal plasma of temperature ~0.6 keV. The Bright Knot, however, is spectrally distinct from the rest of the SNR, requiring the addition of a high-energy spectral component consistent with a power-law spectrum of photon index 1.6--1.8.   We confirm the findings of Nishiuchi et al. (2001) that the spectra of these shells are notably different, with Shell A requiring a high iron abundance for a good spectral fit, implying a Type Ia origin. We further explicitly compare abundance ratios to model predictions for Type Ia and Type II supernovae. The low ratios for Shell A (O/Fe of 1.5 and Ne/Fe of 0.2) and the high ratios for Shell B (O/Fe of 30--130 and Ne/Fe of 8--16) are consistent with Type Ia and Type II origins, respectively. The difference between the SNR progenitor types casts some doubt on the suggestion that these SNRs are interacting with one another.
A fully 3D Monte Carlo scheme is applied to compute optical bolometric light curves for aspherical (jet-like) supernova explosion models. Density and abundance distributions are taken from hydrodynamic explosion models, with the energy varied as a parameter to explore the dependence. Our models show initially a very large degree ($\sim 4$ depending on model parameters) of boosting luminosity toward the polar ($z$) direction relative to the equatorial ($r$) plane, which decreases as the time of peak is approached. After the peak, the factor of the luminosity boost remains almost constant ($\sim 1.2$) until the supernova enters the nebular phase. This behavior is due mostly to the aspherical $^{56}$Ni distribution in the earlier phase and to the disk-like inner low-velocity structure in the later phase. Also the aspherical models yield an earlier peak date than the spherical models, especially if viewed from near the z-axis. Aspherical models with ejecta mass $\sim 10\Msun$ are examined, and one with the kinetic energy of the expansion $\sim 2 \pm 0.5 \times 10^{52}$ ergs and a mass of $^{56}$Ni $\sim 0.4\Msun$ yields a light curve in agreement with the observed light curve of SN 1998bw (the prototypical hyper-energetic supernova). The aspherical model is also at least qualitatively consistent with evolution of photospheric velocities, showing large velocities near the z-axis, and with a late-phase nebular spectrum. The viewing angle is close to the z-axis, strengthening the case for the association of SN 1998bw with the gamma ray burst GRB980425.
We present here the results of a deep (130 ks) XMM-Newton observation of the cluster of galaxies 2A 0335+096. The deep exposure allows us to study in detail its temperature structure and its elemental abundances. We fit three different thermal models and find that the multi-temperature wdem model fits our data best. We find that the abundance structure of the cluster is consistent with a scenario where the relative number of Type Ia supernovae contributing to the enrichment of the intra-cluster medium is ~25%, while the relative number of core collapse supernovae is ~75%. Comparison of the observed abundances to the supernova yields does not allow us to put any constrains on the contribution of Pop III stars to the enrichment of the ICM. Radial abundance profiles show a strong central peak of both Type Ia and core collapse supernova products. Both the temperature and iron abundance maps show an asymmetry in the direction of the elongated morphology of the surface brightness. In particular the temperature map shows a sharp change over a brightness edge on the southern side of the core, which was identified as a cold front in the Chandra data. This suggests that the cluster is in the process of a merger with a subcluster. Moreover, we find that the blobs or filaments discovered in the core of the cluster by Chandra are, contrary to the previous results, colder than the ambient gas and they appear to be in pressure equilibrium with their environment.
We investigate energetic type Ic supernovae as production sites for Li6 and Be in the early stages of the Milky Way. Recent observations have revealed that some very metal-poor stars with [Fe/H]<-2.5 possess unexpectedly high abundances of Li6. Some also exbihit enhanced abundances of Be as well as N.   From a theoretical point of view, recent studies of the evolution of metal-poor massive stars show that rotation-induced mixing can enrich the outer H and He layers with C, N, and O (CNO) elements, particularly N, and at the same time cause intense mass loss of these layers. Here we consider energetic supernova explosions occurring after the progeniter star has lost all but a small fraction of the He layer. The fastest portion of the supernova ejecta can interact directly with the circumstellar matter (CSM), both composed of He and CNO, and induce light element production through spallation and He-He fusion reactions. The CSM should be sufficiently thick to energetic particles so that the interactions terminate within its innermost regions. We calculate the resulting Li6/O and Be9/O ratios in the ejecta+CSM material out of which the very metal-poor stars may form. We find that they are consistent with the observed values if the mass of the He layer remaining on the pre-explosion core is 0.01-0.1 solar mass, and the mass fraction of N mixed in the He layer is about 0.01. Further observations of Li6, Be and N at low metallicity should provide critical tests of this production scenario.
We present Keck optical spectra of SN 2002cx, the most peculiar known Type Ia supernova (SN Ia), taken 227 and 277 days past maximum light. Astonishingly, the spectra are not dominated by the forbidden emission lines of iron that are a hallmark of thermonuclear supernovae in the nebular phase. Instead, we identify numerous P-Cygni profiles of Fe II at very low expansion velocities of about 700 km/s, which are without precedent in SNe Ia. We also report the tentative identification of low-velocity O I in these spectra, suggesting the presence of unburned material near the center of the exploding white dwarf. SN 2002cx is the prototype of a new subclass of SNe Ia, with spectral characteristics that may be consistent with recent pure deflagration models of Chandrasekhar-mass thermonuclear supernovae. These are distinct from the majority of SNe Ia, for which an alternative explosion mechanism, such as a delayed detonation, may be required.
Recent supernovae of type Ia measurements and other astronomical observations suggest that our universe is in accelerating phase of evolution at the present epoch. While a dark energy of unknown form is usually proposed as the most feasible mechanism for the acceleration, there are appears some alternative conception that some effects arising from generalization of Einstein equation can mimic dark energy through a modified Friedmann equation. In this work we investigate some observational constraints on modified Friedmann equation obtained from generalized Lagrangian ${\cal L} \propto R^n$ in minimal coupling with matter in Palatini formalism. We mainly concentrate on the constraints of model parameters from distant supernovae but other constraint from baryon oscillation prior is also considered. We obtain the confidence levels on two additional model parameter ($n$,$\Omega_{m,0}$). We conclude that the FRW model of First-Order Non-linear gravity survives several observational test like SNIa observation and baryon oscillation peaks. We find preferred value of $\Omega_{m,0} \simeq 0.3$ from combined analysis of supernovae data and baryon oscillation peak. For deeper statistical analysis we apply Akaike and Bayesian information criteria of model selection for comparison prediction of the model with prediction of concordance $\Lambda$CDM model.
We propose a method to identify the companion stars of type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) in young supernova remnants (SNRs) by recognizing distinct features of absorption lines due to Fe I appearing in the spectrum. If a sufficient amount of Fe I remains in the ejecta, Fe I atoms moving toward us absorb photons by transitions from the ground state to imprint broad absorption lines exclusively with the blue-shifted components in the spectrum of the companion star. To investigate the time evolution of column depth of Fe I in the ejecta, we have performed hydrodynamical calculations for SNRs expanding into the uniform ambient media, taking into account collisional ionizations, excitations, and photo-ionizations of heavy elements. As a result, it is found that the companion star in Tycho's SNR will exhibit observable features in absorption lines due to Fe I at $\lambda\lambda = 371.9935$ nm and 385.9911 nm if a carbon deflagration SN model is taken. However, these features may disappear by taking another model that emits a few times more intense ionizing photons from the shocked outer layers. To further explore the ionization states in the freely expanding ejecta, we need a reliable model to describe the structure of the outer layers.
It is well-known that the peak brightness of the Type Ia supernovae calibrated with Cepheid distances can be used to determine the Hubble constant. The Cepheid distances to host galaxies of the calibrating supernovae are usually obtained using the period-luminosity (PL) relation derived from Large Magellanic Cloud (LMC) Cepheids. However recent empirical studies provide evidence that the LMC PL relation is not linear. In this Letter we determine the Hubble constant using both the linear and non-linear LMC Cepheid PL relations as calibrating relations to four galaxies that hosted Type Ia supernovae. Our results suggest that the obtained values of the Hubble constant are similar. However a typical error of $\sim0.03$mag. has to be added (in quadrature) to the systematic error for the Hubble constant when the linear LMC PL relation is used, assuming that the LMC PL relation is indeed non-linear. This is important in minimizing the total error of the Hubble constant in the era of precision cosmology. The Hubble constants calibrated from the linear and non-linear LMC PL relation are H_0 = 74.92+-2.28(random)+-5.06(systematic) km/s/Mpc and H_0 = 74.37+-2.27(random)+-4.92(systematic) km/s/Mpc, respectively. Hubble constants calculated using the Galactic PL relations are also briefly discussed and presented in the last section of this Letter.
We discuss fits of cosmological dark energy models to the available data on high-redshift supernovae. We consider a conventional model with Cold Dark Matter and a cosmological constant (LambdaCDM), a model invoking super-horizon perturbations (SHCDM) and models based on Liouville strings in which dark energy is provided by a rolling dilaton field (Q-cosmology). We show that a complete treatment of Q-cosmology requires a careful discussion of non-equilibrium situations (off-shell effects). The two main high-redshift supernova data sets give compatible constraints on LambdaCDM and the other models. We recover the well-known result that LambdaCDM fits very well the combined supernova data sets, as does the super-horizon model. We discuss the model-dependent off-shell corrections to the Q-cosmology model that are relevant to the supernova data, and show that this model fits the data equally well. This analysis could be extended to other aspects of cosmological phenomenology, in particular to the CMB and Baryon Acoustic Oscillations, which have so far been treated using on-shell models.
We explore the role of anisotropic thermal conduction on the evolution of supernova remnants through interstellar media with a range of densities via numerical simulations. We find that a remnant expanding in a dense environment can produce centre-bright hard x-ray emission within 20 kyr, and centre-bright soft x-ray emission within 60 kyr of the supernova event. In a more tenuous environment, the appearance of a centre-bright structure in hard x-rays is delayed until about 60 kyr. The soft x-ray emission from such a remnant may not become centre bright during its observable lifetime. This can explain the observations that show that mixed-morphology supernova remnants preferentially occur close to denser, molecular environments. Remnants expanding into denser environments tend to be smaller, making it easier for thermal conduction to make larger changes in the temperatures of their hot gas bubbles. We show that the lower temperatures make it very favorable to use high-stage ions as diagnostics of the hot gas bubbles in SNRs. In particular, the distribution of O VIII transitions from shell-bright at early epochs to centre-bright at later epochs in the evolution of an SNR expanding in a dense ISM when the physics of thermal conduction is included.
We have used a Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) array at 18cm wavelength to image the nucleus of the luminous IR galaxy Arp 220 at ~1 pc linear resolution, and with very high sensitivity. The resulting map has an rms of 5.5 microJy/beam, and careful image analysis results in 49 confirmed point sources ranging in flux density from 1.2 mJy down to ~60 microJy. Comparison with high sensitivity data from 12 months earlier reveals at least four new sources. The favored interpretation of these sources is that they are radio supernovae, and if all new supernovae are detectable at this sensitivity, a resulting estimate of the supernova rate in the Arp 220 system is 4 +/- 2 per year. The implied star formation rate is sufficient to power the entire observed far-infrared luminosity of the galaxy. The two nuclei of Arp 220 exhibit striking similarities in their radio properties, though the western nucleus is more compact, and appears to be ~3 times more luminous than the eastern nucleus. There are also some puzzling differences, and differential free-free absorption, synchrotron aging and expansion losses may all be playing a role. Comparison with the nearby starburst galaxy M82 supports the hypothesis that the activity in Arp 220 is essentially a scaled-up version of that in M82.
The nature of star formation and Type Ia supernovae (SNIa) in galaxies in the field and in rich galaxy clusters are contrasted by juxtaposing the build-up of heavy metals in the universe inferred from observed star formation and supernovae rate histories with data on the evolution of Fe abundances in the intracluster medium (ICM). Models for the chemical evolution of Fe in these environments are constructed, subject to observational constraints, for this purpose. While models with a mean delay for SNIa of 3 Gyr and standard initial mass function (IMF) are consistent with observations in the field, cluster Fe enrichment immediately tracks a rapid, top-heavy phase of star formation -- although transport of Fe into the ICM may be more prolonged and star formation likely continues to redshifts <1. The source of this prompt enrichment is Type II supernovae (SNII) yielding at least 0.1 solar masses per explosion (if the SNIa rate normalization is scaled down from its value in the field according to the relative number of candidate progenitor stars in the 3-8 solar mass range) and/or SNIa explosions with short delay times associated with the rapid star formation mode. Star formation is >3 times more efficient in rich clusters than in the field, mitigating the overcooling problem in numerical cluster simulations. Both the fraction of baryons cycled through stars, and the fraction of the total present-day stellar mass in the form of stellar remnants, are substantially greater in clusters than in the field.
We report the progress to date from an ongoing unbiased ultraviolet survey of supernova remnants in the Magellanic Clouds using the Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) satellite. This survey is obtaining spectra of a random large sample of Magellanic Cloud supernova remnants with a broad range of radio, optical, and X-ray properties. To date, 39 objects have been observed in the survey (38 in the LMC and one in the SMC) and 15 have been detected, a detection rate of nearly 40%. Our survey has nearly tripled the number of UV-detected SNRs in the Magellanic Clouds (from 8 to 22). Because of the diffuse source sensitivity of FUSE, upper limits on non-detected objects are quite sensitive in many cases. Estimated total luminosities in O~VI span a broad range from considerably brighter to many times fainter than the inferred soft X-ray luminosities, indicating that O~VI can be an important and largely unrecognized coolant in certain objects. We compare the optical and X-ray properties of the detected and non-detected objects but do not find a simple indicator for ultraviolet detectability. Non-detections may be due to clumpiness of the emission, high foreground extinction, slow shocks whose emission gets attenuated by the Magellanic interstellar medium, or a combination of these effects.
We present late-time optical and mid-infrared observations of the Type-II supernova 2003gd in NGC 628. Mid-infrared excesses consistent with cooling dust in the ejecta are observed 499-678 days after outburst, and are accompanied by increasing optical extinction and growing asymmetries in the emission-line profiles. Radiative-transfer models show that up to 0.02 solar masses of dust has formed within the ejecta, beginning as early as 250 days after outburst. These observations show that dust formation in supernova ejecta can be efficient and that massive-star supernovae can be major dust producers throughout the history of the Universe.
The conditions for the leading r-process site candidate, neutrino-driven winds, can not be reproduced self-consistently in current supernova models. For that reason, we investigate an alternate model involving the mass ejected by fallback in a supernova explosion, through hydrodynamic and nucleosynthesis calculations. The nucleosynthetic products of this ejected material produces r-process elements, including those in the vicinity of the elusive 3rd peak at mass number 195. Trans-iron element production beyond the second peak is made possible by a rapid (<1ms) freezeout of alpha particles which leaves behind a large nucleon (including protons!) to r-process seed ratio. This rapid phase is followed by a relatively long (>15 ms) simmering phase at ~2e9 K, which is the thermodynamic consequence of the hydrodynamic trajectory of the turbulent flows in the fallback outburst. During the slow phase high mass elements beyond the second peak are first made through rapid capture of both protons and neutrons. The flow stays close to valley of stability during this phase. After freeze-out of protons the remaining neutrons cause a shift out to short-lived isotopes as is typical for the r-process. A low electron fraction isn't required in this model, however, the detailed final distribution is sensitive to the electron fraction. Our simulations suggest that supernova fallback is a viable alternative scenario for the r-process.
We report on our search for the optical/infrared counterparts to the central compact objects in four young supernova remnants: Pup A, PKS 1209-52, RCW 103, and Cas A. The X-ray point sources in these supernova remnants are excellent targets for probing the existence of supernova fallback disks, since irradiation of a disk by a central X-ray source should lead to an infrared excess. We used ground-based optical and near-infrared imaging and Spitzer Space Telescope mid-infrared imaging to search for optical/infrared counterparts at the X-ray point source positions measured by the Chandra X-Ray Observatory. We did not detect any counterparts, and hence find no evidence for fallback disks around any of these sources. In PKS 1209-52, we are able to exclude a nearby optical/infrared candidate counterpart. In RCW 103, a blend of 3 faint stars at the X-ray source position prevents us from deriving useful limits. For the other targets, the upper limits on the infrared/X-ray flux ratio are as deep as (1.0--1.7)$\times 10^{-4}$. Comparing these limits to the ratio of $\approx 6\times10^{-5}$ measured for 4U 0142+61 (a young pulsar recently found with an X-ray irradiated dust disk), we conclude that the non-detection of any disks around young neutron stars studied here are consistent with their relatively low X-ray luminosities, although we note that a similar dust disk around the neutron star in Pup A should be detectable by deeper infrared observations.
We present observations of two LMC supernova remnants (SNRs), DEM L238 and DEM L249, with the Chandra and XMM-Newton X-ray satellites. Bright central emission, surrounded by a faint shell, is present in both remnants. The central emission has an entirely thermal spectrum dominated by strong Fe L-shell lines, with the deduced Fe abundance in excess of solar and not consistent with the LMC abundance. This Fe overabundance leads to the conclusion that DEM L238 and DEM L249 are remnants of thermonuclear (Type Ia) explosions. The shell emission originates in gas swept up and heated by the blast wave. A standard Sedov analysis implies about 50 solar masses in both swept-up shells, SNR ages between 10,000 and 15,000 yr, low (< 0.05 cm^-3) preshock densities, and subluminous explosions with energies of 3x10^50 ergs. The central Fe-rich supernova ejecta are close to collisional ionization equilibrium. Their presence is unexpected, because standard Type Ia SNR models predict faint ejecta emission with short ionization ages. Both SNRs belong to a previously unrecognized class of Type Ia SNRs characterized by bright interior emission. Denser than expected ejecta and/or a dense circumstellar medium around the progenitors are required to explain the presence of Fe-rich ejecta in these SNRs. Substantial amounts of circumstellar gas are more likely to be present in explosions of more massive Type Ia progenitors. DEM L238, DEM L249, and similar SNRs could be remnants of ``prompt'' Type Ia explosions with young (~100 Myr old) progenitors.
We consider a newly-born millisecond magnetar, focusing on its interaction with the dense stellar plasma in which it is initially embedded. We argue that the confining pressure and inertia of the surrounding plasma acts to collimate the magnetar's Poynting-flux-dominated outflow into tightly beamed jets and increases its magnetic luminosity. We propose this process as an essential ingredient in the magnetar model for gamma-ray burst and asymmetric supernova central engines. We introduce the ``pulsar-in-a-cavity'' as an important model problem representing a magnetized rotating neutron star inside a collapsing star. We describe its essential properties and derive simple estimates for the evolution of the magnetic field and the resulting spin-down power. We find that the infalling stellar mantle confines the magnetosphere, enabling a gradual build-up of the toroidal magnetic field due to continuous twisting. The growing magnetic pressure eventually becomes dominant, resulting in a magnetically-driven explosion. The initial phase of the explosion is quasi-isotropic, potentially exposing a sufficient amount of material to $^{56}$Ni-producing temperatures to result in a bright supernova. However, if significant expansion of the star occurs prior to the explosion, then very little $^{56}$Ni is produced and no supernova is expected. In either case, hoop stress subsequently collimates the magnetically-dominated outflow, leading to the formation of a magnetic tower. After the star explodes, the decrease in bounding pressure causes the magnetic outflow to become less beamed. However, episodes of late fallback can reform the beamed outflow, which may be responsible for late X-ray flares.
Doubly-degenerate binary systems consisting of two white dwarfs both composed of carbon and oxygen and close enough that mass is transferred from the less massive to the more massive are possible progenitors of type Ia supernovae. If the mass transfer rate is slow enough that the accreting white dwarf can reach 1.38 solar masses then it can ignite carbon degenerately at its centre. This can lead to a thermonuclear runaway and thence a supernova explosion. However if the accretion rate is too high the outer layers of the white dwarf heat up too much and carbon ignites there non-degenerately. A series of mild carbon flashes can then propagate inwards and convert the carbon to neon relatively gently. There is no thermonuclear runaway and no supernova. We have determined the critical rate for accretion and find it to be generally about two-fifths of the Eddington rate. In the case of actual bianry stars the mass transfer rate falls off as mass is transferred so we find that this rate can be very much exceeded at the onset of mass transfer. We determine combinations of white dwarf masses that can lead to central degenerate carbon ignition.
The use of type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) as cosmological standard candles is fundamental in modern observational cosmology. In this letter, we derive a simple empirical photometric redshift estimator for SNe Ia using a training set of SNe Ia with multiband ($griz$) light-curves and spectroscopic redshifts obtained by the Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS). This estimator is analytical and model-independent; it does not use spectral templates. We use all the available SNe Ia from SNLS with near maximum photometry in $griz$ (a total of 40 SNe Ia) to train and test our photometric redshift estimator. The difference between the estimated redshifts $z_{phot}$ and the spectroscopic redshifts $z_{spec}$, $(z_{phot}-z_{spec})/(1+z_{spec})$, has rms dispersions of 0.031 for 20 SNe Ia used in the training set, and 0.050 for 20 SNe Ia not used in the training set. The dispersion is of the same order of magnitude as the flux uncertainties at peak brightness for the SNe Ia. There are no outlyers.   This photometric redshift estimator should significantly enhance the ability of observers to accurately target high redshift SNe Ia for spectroscopy in ongoing surveys. It will also dramatically boost the cosmological impact of very large future supernova surveys, such as those planned for Advanced Liquid-mirror Probe for Astrophysics, Cosmology and Asteroids (ALPACA), and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST).
In the context of 2D, axisymmetric, multi-group, radiation/hydrodynamic simulations of core-collapse supernovae over the full 180$^{\circ}$ domain, we present an exploration of the progenitor dependence of the acoustic mechanism of explosion. All progenitor models we have tested with our Newtonian code explode. We investigate the roles of the Standing-Accretion-Shock-Instability (SASI), the excitation of core g-modes, the generation of core acoustic power, the ejection of matter with r-process potential, the wind-like character of the explosion, and the fundamental anisotropy of the blasts. We find that the breaking of spherical symmetry is central to the supernova phenomenon and the blasts, when top-bottom asymmetric, are self-collimating. We see indications that the initial explosion energies are larger for the more massive progenitors, and smaller for the less massive progenitors, and that the neutrino contribution to the explosion energy may be an increasing function of progenitor mass. The degree of explosion asymmetry we obtain is completely consistent with that inferred from the polarization measurements of Type Ic supernovae. Furthermore, we calculate for the first time the magnitude and sign of the net impulse on the core due to anisotropic neutrino emission and suggest that hydrodynamic and neutrino recoils in the context of our asymmetric explosions afford a natural mechanism for observed pulsar proper motions. [abridged]
We present four spectra of the Type Ia supernova (SN Ia) 2006D extending from -7 to +13 days with respect to B-band maximum. The spectra include the strongest signature of unburned material at photospheric velocities observed in a SN Ia to date. The earliest spectrum exhibits C II absorption features below 14,000 km/s, including a distinctive C II \lambda 6580 absorption feature. The carbon signatures dissipate as the SN approaches peak brightness. In addition to discussing implications of photospheric-velocity carbon for white dwarf explosion models, we outline some factors that may influence the frequency of its detection before and around peak brightness. Two effects are explored in this regard, including depopulation of the C II optical levels by non-LTE effects, and line-of-sight effects resulting from a clumpy distribution of unburned material with low volume-filling factor.
We present a detonating failed deflagration model of Type Ia supernovae. In this model, the thermonuclear explosion of a massive white dwarf follows an off-center deflagration. We conduct a survey of asymmetric ignition configurations initiated at various distances from the stellar center. In all cases studied, we find that only a small amount of stellar fuel is consumed during deflagration phase, no explosion is obtained, and the released energy is mostly wasted on expanding the progenitor. Products of the failed deflagration quickly reach the stellar surface, polluting and strongly disturbing it. These disturbances eventually evolve into small and isolated shock-dominated regions which are rich in fuel. We consider these regions as seeds capable of forming self-sustained detonations that, ultimately, result in the thermonuclear supernova explosion. Preliminary nucleosynthesis results indicate the model supernova ejecta are typically composed of about 0.1-0.25 Msun of silicon group elements, 0.9-1.2 Msun of iron group elements, and are essentially carbon-free. The ejecta have a composite morphology, are chemically stratified, and display a modest amount of intrinsic asymmetry. The innermost layers are slightly egg-shaped with the axis ratio ~1.2-1.3 and dominated by the products of silicon burning. This central region is surrounded by a shell of silicon-group elements. The outermost layers of ejecta are highly inhomogeneous and contain products of incomplete oxygen burning with only small admixture of unburned stellar material. The explosion energies are ~1.3-1.5 10^51 erg.
In this paper, we bring together various of our published and unpublished findings from our recent 2D multi-group, flux-limited radiation hydrodynamic simulations of the collapse and explosion of the cores of massive stars. Aided by 2D and 3D graphical renditions, we motivate the acoustic mechanism of core-collapse supernova explosions and explain, as best we currently can, the phases and phenomena that attend this mechanism. Two major foci of our presentation are the outer shock instability and the inner core g-mode oscillations. The former sets the stage for the latter, which damp by the generation of sound. This sound propagates outward to energize the explosion and is relevant only if the core has not exploded earlier by some other means. Hence, it is a more delayed mechanism than the traditional neutrino mechanism that has been studied for the last twenty years since it was championed by Bethe and Wilson. We discuss protoneutron star convection, accretion-induced-collapse, gravitational wave emissions, pulsar kicks, the angular anisotropy of the neutrino emissions, a subset of numerical issues, and a new code we are designing that should supercede our current supernova code VULCAN/2D. Whatever ideas last from this current generation of numerical results, and whatever the eventual mechanism(s), we conclude that the breaking of spherical symmetry will survive as one of the crucial keys to the supernova puzzle.
We present an updated version of the Multicolor Light Curve Shape method to measure distances to type Ia supernovae (SN Ia), incorporating new procedures for K-correction and extinction corrections. We also develop a simple model to disentangle intrinsic color variations and reddening by dust, and expand the method to incorporate U-band light curves and to more easily accommodate prior constraints on any of the model parameters. We apply this method to 133 nearby SN Ia, including 95 objects in the Hubble flow (cz >= 2500 km/s), which give an intrinsic dispersion of less than 7% in distance. The Hubble flow sample, which is of critical importance to all cosmological uses of SN Ia, is the largest ever presented with homogeneous distances. We find the Hubble flow supernovae with Hd >= 7400 km/s yield an expansion rate that is 6.5 +/- 1.8% lower than the rate determined from supernovae within that distance, and this can have a large effect on measurements of the dark energy equation of state with SN Ia. Peculiar velocities of SN Ia host galaxies in the rest frame of the Local Group are consistent with the dipole measured in the Cosmic Microwave Background. Direct fits of SN Ia that are significantly reddened by dust in their host galaxies suggest their mean extinction law may be described by R_V ~= 2.7, but optical colors alone provide weak constraints on R_V.
I address the question of what can be learned from the observation of the diffuse supernova neutrino flux in the precision phase, at next generation detectors of Megaton scale. An analytical study of the spectrum of the diffuse flux shows that, above realistic detection thresholds of 10 MeV or higher, the spectrum essentially reflects the exponential-times-polynomial structure of the original neutrino spectrum at the emission point. There is only a weak (tens of per cent) dependence on the power \beta describing the growth of the supernova rate with the redshift. Different original neutrino spectra correspond to large differences in the observed spectrum of events at a water Cerenkov detector: for typical supernova rates, the ratio of the numbers of events in the first and second energy bins (of 5 MeV width) varies in the interval 1.5 - 4.3 for pure water (energy threshold 18 MeV) and in the range 1 - 2.5 for water with Gadolinium (10 MeV threshold). In the first case discrimination would be difficult due to the large errors associated with background. With Gadolinium, instead, the reduction of the total error down to 10-20 % level would allow spectral sensitivity, with a dramatic improvement of precision with respect to the SN1987A data. Even in this latter case, for typical neutrino luminosity the dependence on \beta is below sensitivity, so that it can be safely neglected in data analysis.
We present a progress report on a project to derive the evolution of the volumetric supernova Type Ia rate from the Supernova Legacy Survey. Our preliminary estimate of the rate evolution divides the sample from Neill et al. (2006) into two redshift bins: 0.2 < z < 0.4, and 0.4 < z < 0.6. We extend this by adding a bin from the sample analyzed in Sullivan et al. (2006) in the range 0.6 < z < 0.75 from the same time period. We compare the derived trend with previously published rates and a supernova Type Ia production model having two components: one component associated closely with star formation and an additional component associated with host galaxy mass. Our observed trend is consistent with this model, which predicts a rising SN Ia rate out to at least z=2.
We present early-time optical and near-infrared photometry of supernova (SN) 2005cf. The observations, spanning a period from about 12 days before to 3 months after maximum, have been obtained through the coordination of observational efforts of various nodes of the European Supernova Collaboration and including data obtained at the 2m Himalayan Chandra Telescope. From the observed light curve we deduce that SN 2005cf is a fairly typical SN Ia with a post-maximum decline (Delta m_15(B) = 1.12) close to the average value and a normal luminosity of M_B,max = -19.39+/-0.33. Models of the bolometric light curve suggest a synthesised 56Ni mass of about 0.7 solar masses. The negligible host galaxy interstellar extinction and its proximity make SN 2005cf a good Type Ia supernova template.
We propose new diagnostics for circumstellar interaction in Type IIP supernovae by the detection of high velocity (HV) absorption features in Halpha and He I 10830 A lines during the photospheric stage. To demonstrate the method, we compute the ionization and excitation of H and He in supernova ejecta taking into account time-dependent effects and X-ray irradiation. We find that the interaction with a typical red supergiant wind should result in the enhanced excitation of the outer layers of unshocked ejecta and the emergence of corresponding HV absorption, i.e. a depression in the blue absorption wing of Halpha and a pronounced absorption of He I 10830 A at a radial velocity of about -10,000 km/s. We identify HV absorption in Halpha and He I 10830 A lines of SN 1999em and in Halpha of SN 2004dj as being due to this effect. The derived mass loss rate is close to 10^{-6} Msun/yr for both supernovae, assuming a wind velocity 10 km/s. We argue that, in addition to the HV absorption formed in the unshocked ejecta, spectra of SN 2004dj and SN 1999em show a HV notch feature that is formed in the cool dense shell (CDS) modified by the Rayleigh-Taylor instability. The CDS results from both shock breakout and radiative cooling of gas that has passed through the reverse shock wave. The notch becomes dominant in the HV absorption during the late photospheric phase, ~60 d. The wind density deduced from the velocity of the CDS is consistent with the wind density found from the HV absorption produced by unshocked ejecta.
We report the results of a series of three-dimensional (3-D) simulations of the deflagration phase of the gravitationally confined detonation mechanism for Type Ia supernovae. In this mechanism, ignition occurs at one or several off-center points, resulting in a burning bubble of hot ash that rises rapidly, breaks through the surface of the star, and collides at a point opposite breakout on the stellar surface. We find that detonation conditions are robustly reached in our 3-D simulations for a range of initial conditions and resolutions. Detonation conditions are achieved as the result of an inwardly-directed jet that is produced by the compression of unburnt surface material when the surface flow collides with itself. A high-velocity outwardly-directed jet is also produced. The initial conditions explored in this paper lead to conditions at detonation that can be expected to produce large amounts of $^{56}$Ni and small amounts of intermediate mass elements. These particular simulations are therefore relevant only to high luminosity Type Ia supernovae. Recent observations of Type Ia supernovae imply a compositional structure that is qualitatively consistent with that expected from these simulations.
Helium that accretes onto a Carbon/Oxygen white dwarf in the double white dwarf AM Canum Venaticorum (AM CVn) binaries undergoes unstable thermonuclear flashes when the orbital period is in the 3.5-25 minute range. At the shortest orbital periods (and highest accretion rates, Mdot > 10^-7 Msol/yr), the flashes are weak and likely lead to the Helium equivalent of classical nova outbursts. However, as the orbit widens and Mdot drops, the mass required for the unstable ignition increases, leading to progressively more violent flashes up to a final flash with Helium shell mass ~ 0.02-0.1 Msol. The high pressures of these last flashes allow the burning to produce the radioactive elements 48Cr, 52Fe, and 56Ni that power a faint (M_V in the range of -15 to -18) and rapidly rising (few days) thermonuclear supernova. Current galactic AM CVn space densities imply one such explosion every 5,000-15,000 years in 10^11 Msol of old stars (~ 2-6% of the Type Ia rate in E/SO galaxies). These ".Ia" supernovae (one-tenth as bright for one-tenth the time as a Type Ia supernovae) are excellent targets for deep (e.g. V=24) searches with nightly cadences, potentially yielding an all-sky rate of 1,000 per year.
This note describes fitting formulae for the gravitational waveforms generated by a rapidly rotating neutron star (e.g., newly-formed in the core collapse of a supernova) as it evolves from an initial axisymmetric configuration toward a triaxial ellipsoid.
Charged cosmic rays have been measured up to macroscopic energies. Concerning neutrinos, the detection is still limited to terrestrial ones (apart from supernova production). A new way to search for extragalactic neutrinos is discussed.
For non-universal gaugino masses, collider experiments do not provide any lower bound on the mass of the lightest neutralino. We review the supersymmetric parameter space which leads to light neutralinos, $M_\lsp \lsim {\cal O}(1\gev)$, and find that such neutralinos are almost pure bino. In light of this, we examine the neutralino lower mass bound obtained from supernova 1987A (SN1987A). We consider the production of binos in both electron-positron annihilation and nucleon-nucleon binostrahlung. For electron-positron annihilation, we take into account the radial and temporal dependence of the temperature and degeneracy of the supernova core. We also separately consider the Raffelt criterion and show that the two lead to consistent results. For the case of bino production in $NN$ collisions, we use the Raffelt criterion and incorporate recent advances in the understanding of the strong-interaction part of the calculation in order to estimate the impact of bino radiation on the SN1987A neutrino signal. Considering these two bino production channels allows us to determine separate and combined limits on the neutralino mass as a function of the selectron and squark masses. For $M_\lsp \sim 100 \mev$ values of the selectron mass between 300 and 900 GeV are inconsistent with the supernova neutrino signal. On the other hand, in contrast to previous works, we find that SN1987A provides almost no bound on the squark masses: only a small window of values around 300 GeV can be excluded, and even then this window closes once $M_\lsp \gsim 20 \mev$.
We consider for the first time R-parity violating interactions of the Minimal Standard Supersymmetric Model involving neutrinos and quarks (``flavor changing neutral currents'', FCNC's) in the infall stage of stellar collapse. Our considerations extend to other kinds of flavor changing neutrino reactions as well. We examine non-forward neutrino scattering processes on heavy nuclei and free nucleons in the supernova core. This investigation has led to four principal original discoveries/products: (1) first calculation of neutrino flavor changing cross sections for spin one half (e.g. free nucleon) and spin zero nuclear targets; (2) discovery of nuclear mass number squared (A squared) coherent amplification of neutrino-quark FCNC's; (3) analysis of FCNC-induced alteration of electron capture and weak/nuclear equilibrium in the collapsing core; and (4) generalization of the calculated cross sections (mentioned in 1) for the case of hot heavy nuclei to be used in collapse/supernova and neutrino transport simulations. The scattering processes that we consider allow electron neutrinos to change flavor during core collapse, thereby opening holes in the electron neutrino sea, which allows electron capture to proceed and results in a lower core electron fraction. A lower electron fraction implies a lower homologous core mass, a lower shock energy, and a greater nuclear photo-disintegration burden for the shock. In addition, unlike the standard supernova model, the core now could have net muon and/or tau lepton numbers. These effects could be significant even for supersymmetric couplings below current experimental bounds.
This paper has been withdrawn due to the use of some incorrect neutrino parameter space ranges.
We study characteristics of the relativistic equation of state (EOS) for collapse-driven supernovae, which is derived by relativistic nuclear many body theory. Recently the relativistic EOS table has become available as a new complete set of physical EOS for numerical simulations of supernova explosion. We examine this EOS table by using general relativistic hydrodynamics of the gravitational collapse and bounce of supernova cores. In order to study dense matter in dynamical situation, we perform simplified calculations of core collapse and bounce by following adiabatic collapse with the fixed electron fraction for a series of progenitor models. This is intended to give us ``approximate models'' of prompt explosion. We investigate the profiles of thermodynamical quantities and the compositions during collapse and bounce. We also perform the calculations with the Lattimer-Swesty EOS to compare the properties of dense matter. As a measure of the stiffness of the EOS, we examine the explosion energy of the prompt explosion with electron capture totally suppressed. We study the derivative of the thermodynamical quantities obtained by the relativistic EOS to discuss the convective condition in neutron-rich environment, which may be important in the delayed explosion.
I review progress that has been made in nuclear astrophysics over the past few years and summarize some of the questions that remain. Topics selected include solar neutrinos, supernovae (the explosion and associated nucleosynthesis), laboratory astrophysics, and neutron star structure.
We have been monitoring Supernova (SN) 1987A with {\it Chandra X-Ray Observatory} since 1999. We present a review of previous results from our {\it Chandra} observations, and some preliminary results from new {\it Chandra} data obtained in 2006 and 2007. High resolution imaging and spectroscopic studies of SN 1987A with {\it Chandra} reveal that X-ray emission of SN 1987A originates from the hot gas heated by interaction of the blast wave with the ring-like dense circumstellar medium (CSM) that was produced by the massive progenitor's equatorial stellar winds before the SN explosion. The blast wave is now sweeping through dense CSM all around the inner ring, and thus SN 1987A is rapidly brightening in soft X-rays. At the age of 20 yr (as of 2007 January), X-ray luminosity of SN 1987A is $L_{\rm X}$ $\sim$ 2.4 $\times$ 10$^{36}$ ergs s$^{-1}$ in the 0.5$-$10 keV band. X-ray emission is described by two-component plane shock model with electron temperatures of $kT$ $\sim$ 0.3 and 2 keV. As the shock front interacts with dense CSM all around the inner ring, the X-ray remnant is now expanding at a much slower rate of $v$ $\sim$ 1400 km s$^{-1}$ than it was until 2004 ($v$ $\sim$ 6000 km s$^{-1}$).
We studied the effect of supernovae feedback on a disk galaxy, taking into account the impact of infalling gas on both the star formation history and the corresponding outflow structure, the apparition of a supernovae-driven wind being highly sensitive to the halo mass, the galaxy spin and the star formation efficiency. We model our galaxies as cooling and collapsing NFW spheres. The dark matter component is modelled as a static external potential, while the baryon component is described by the Euler equations using the AMR code RAMSES. Metal-dependent cooling and supernovae-heating are also implemented using state-of-the-art recipes coming from cosmological simulations. We allow for 3 parameters to vary: the halo circular velocity, the spin parameter and the star formation efficiency. We found that the ram pressure of infalling material is the key factor limiting the apparition of galactic winds. We obtain a very low feedback efficiency, with supernovae to wind energy conversion factor around one percent, so that only low cicrular velocity galaxies give rise to strong winds. For massive galaxies, we obtain a galatic fountain, for which we discuss the observational properties. We conclude that for quiescent isolated galaxies, galactic winds appear only in very low mass systems. Although that can quite efficiently enrich the IGM with metals, they don't carry away enough cold material to solve the overcooling problem.
This paper has been withdrawn by the author, due to errors in the figures.
Pair creation supernovae (PCSN) are thought to be produced from very massive low metallicity stars. The spectacularly bright SN 2006gy does show signatures expected from PCSNe. Here, we investigate the metallicity threshold below which PCSN can form and estimate their occurrence rate. We perform stellar evolution calculations for stars of 150$\mso$ and 250$\mso$ of low metallicity (Z$_{\odot}$/5 and Z$_{\odot}$/20), and analyze their mass loss rates. We find that the bifurcation between quasi-chemically homogeneous evolution for fast rotation and conventional evolution for slower rotation, which has been found earlier for massive low metallicity stars, persists in the mass range considered here. Consequently, there are two separate PCSN progenitor types: (I) Fast rotators produce PCSNe from very massive Wolf-Rayet stars, and (II) Slower rotators that generate PCSNe in hydrogen-rich massive yellow hypergiants. We find that hydrogen-rich PCSNe could occur at metallicities as high as Z$_{\odot}$/3, which -- assuming standard IMFs are still valid to estimate their birth rates -- results in a rate of about one PCSN per 1000 supernovae in the local universe, and one PCSN per 100 supernovae at a redshift of $z=5$. PCSNe from WC-type Wolf-Rayet stars are restricted to much lower metallicity.
This paper has been withdrawn by the author, due to errors in the figures.
In this contribution we discuss the 44Ti nucleosynthesis gamma-ray lines and their visibility with SIMBOL-X from simulations based on its expected sensitivity and spectro-imaging capabilities. The 44Ti radioactive nucleus can provide invaluable information on the details of supernova explosions. Its lifetime of about 85 yrs makes it the best indicator of the youth of these stellar explosions through its three gamma-ray lines at 67.9, 78.4 keV and 1.157 MeV. We focus on the youngest Galactic supernova remnants, namely: Cassiopeia A, for which the location and Doppler-velocity estimates of the 44Ti-emitting regions in the remnant would offer for the first time a unique view of nucleosynthesis processes which occurred in the innermost layers of the supernova; SN 1987A, in the Large Magellanic Cloud, whose progenitor is known, and for which the expected measurement of these lines would greatly constrain the stellar evolution models; Tycho and Kepler SNRs for which 44Ti lines have never been detected so far. The issue of the "young, missing and hidden" supernova remnants in the Galaxy will also be addressed using SIMBOL-X observations at the position of the 44Ti excesses that wide-field instruments like those onboard INTEGRAL and SWIFT/BAT should be able to reveal.
We report a radio detection of supernova SN 2004ip in the circumnuclear region of the luminous infrared galaxy IRAS 18293-3413, using Very Large Array (VLA) observations at 8.4 GHz on 11 June 2007. SN 2004ip had been previously discovered at near-infrared wavelengths using adaptive optics observations, but its nature (core-collapse or thermonuclear) could not be definitely established. Our radio detection, about three years after the explosion of the supernova, indicates a prominent interaction of the ejecta of SN 2004ip with the circumstellar medium, confirming that the supernova was a core-collapse event (probably Type II), and thus strongly suggesting that its progenitor was a massive star with a significant mass-loss prior to its explosion. SN 2004ip has a 8.4 GHz luminosity of 3.5E27 erg/s/Hz, about twice as bright as SN 2000ft in NGC 7469 at a similar age, and given its projected distance to the nucleus (~500 pc), is one of the closest of all known radio SNe to a galaxy nucleus, and one of the brightest radio SNe ever.
Despite intense scrutiny, the progenitor system(s) that gives rise to Type Ia supernovae remains unknown. The favored theory invokes a carbon-oxygen white dwarf accreting hydrogen-rich material from a close companion until a thermonuclear runaway ensues that incinerates the white dwarf. However, simulations resulting from this single-degenerate, binary channel demand the presence of low-velocity H-alpha emission in spectra taken during the late nebular phase, since a portion of the companion's envelope becomes entrained in the ejecta. This hydrogen has never been detected, but has only rarely been sought. Here we present results from a campaign to obtain deep, nebular-phase spectroscopy of nearby Type Ia supernovae, and include multi-epoch observations of two events: SN 2005am (slightly subluminous) and SN 2005cf (normally bright). No H-alpha emission is detected in the spectra of either object. An upper limit of 0.01 M_Sun of solar abundance material in the ejecta is established from the models of Mattila et al. which, when coupled with the mass-stripping simulations of Marietta et al. and Meng et al. effectively rules out progenitor systems for these supernovae with secondaries close enough to the white dwarf to be experiencing Roche lobe overflow at the time of explosion. Alternative explanations for the absence of H-alpha emission, along with suggestions for future investigations necessary to confidently exclude them as possibilities, are critically evaluated.
We discuss implications of recent precision measurements for the Rh93 proton separation energy for the production of the lightest molybdenum isotopes in proton-rich type II supernova ejecta. It has recently been shown that a novel neutrino-induced process makes these ejecta a promising site for the production of the light molybdenum isotopes and other "p-nuclei" with atomic mass near 100. The origin of these isotopes has long been uncertain. A distinguishing feature of nucleosynthesis in neutrino-irradiated outflows is that the relative production of Mo92 and Mo94 is set by a competition governed by the proton separation energy of Rh93. We use detailed nuclear network calculations and the recent experimental results for this proton separation energy to place constraints on the outflow characteristics that produce the lightest molybdenum isotopes in their solar proportions. It is found that for the conditions calculated in recent two-dimensional supernova simulations, and also for a large range of outflow characteristics around these conditions, the solar ratio of Mo92 to Mo94 cannot be achieved. This suggests that either proton-rich winds from type II supernova do not exclusively produce both isotopes, or that these winds are qualitatively different than calculated in today's supernova models.
We report here on recent progress in understanding the birth conditions of neutron stars and the way how supernovae explode. More sophisticated numerical models have led to the discovery of new phenomena in the supernova core, for example a generic hydrodynamic instability of the stagnant supernova shock against low-mode nonradial deformation and the excitation of gravity-wave activity in the surface and core of the nascent neutron star. Both can have supportive or decisive influence on the inauguration of the explosion, the former by improving the conditions for energy deposition by neutrino heating in the postshock gas, the latter by supplying the developing blast with a flux of acoustic power that adds to the energy transfer by neutrinos. While recent two-dimensional models suggest that the neutrino-driven mechanism may be viable for stars from about 8 solar masses to at least 15 solar masses, acoustic energy input has been advocated as an alternative if neutrino heating fails. Magnetohydrodynamic effects constitute another way to trigger explosions in connection with the collapse of sufficiently rapidly rotating stellar cores, perhaps linked to the birth of magnetars. The global explosion asymmetries seen in the recent simulations offer an explanation of even the highest measured kick velocities of young neutron stars.
In the framework of a program for the monitoring of Supernovae in the Near-Infrared (NIR) carried out by the Teramo, Rome and Pulkovo observatories with the AZT-24 telescope, we observed the Supernova SN2006jc in the J,H,K photometric bands during a period of 7 months, starting ~36 days after its discovery. Our observations evidence a NIR re-brightening, peaking ~70 days after discovery, along with a reddening of H-K and J-H colors until 120 days from discovery. After that date, J-H seems to evolve towards bluer colors. Our data, complemented by IR, optical, UV and X-ray observations found in the literature, show that the re-brightening is produced by hot dust surrounding the supernova, formed in the interaction of the ejecta with dense circumstellar matter.
We present an extension to our XMM-Newton X-ray source catalogue of M 31, containing 39 newly found sources. In order to classify and identify more of the sources we search for X-ray time variability in XMM-Newton archival data of the M 31 centre field.   As a source list we used our extended catalogue based on observations covering the time span from June 2000 to July 2004. We then determined the flux or at least an upper limit at the source positions for each observation. Deriving the flux ratios for the different observations and searching for the maximum flux difference we determined variability factors. We also calculated the significance of the flux ratios.   Using hardness ratios, X-ray variability and cross correlations with catalogues in the X-ray, optical, infrared and radio regimes, we detected three super soft source candidates, one supernova remnant and six supernova remnant candidates, one globular cluster candidate, three X-ray binaries and four X-ray binary candidates. Additionally we identified one foreground star candidate and classified fifteen sources with hard spectra, which may either be X-ray binaries or Crab-like supernova remnants in M 31 or background active galactic nuclei. The remaining five sources stay unidentified or without classification. Based on the time variability results we suggest six sources, which were formerly classified as "hard", to be X-ray binary candidates. The classification of one other source (XMMM31 J004236.7+411349) as a supernova remnant, has to be rejected due to the distinct time variability we found. We now classify this source as a foreground star.
The Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope Supernova Legacy Survey (SNLS) has created a large homogeneous database of intermediate redshift (0.2 < z < 1.0) type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). The SNLS team has shown that correlations exist between SN Ia rates, properties, and host galaxy star formation rates. The SNLS SN Ia database has now been combined with a photometric redshift galaxy catalog and an optical galaxy cluster catalog to investigate the possible influence of galaxy clustering on the SN Ia rate, over and above the expected effect due to the dependence of SFR on clustering through the morphology-density relation. We identify three cluster SNe Ia, plus three additional possible cluster SNe Ia, and find the SN Ia rate per unit mass in clusters at intermediate redshifts is consistent with the rate per unit mass in field early-type galaxies and the SN Ia cluster rate from low redshift cluster targeted surveys. We also find the number of SNe Ia in cluster environments to be within a factor of two of expectations from the two component SNIa rate model.
We present Very Large Array (VLA) radio interferometry observations of the 1720 MHz OH masers in the Galactic Center (GC). Most 1720 MHz OH masers arise in regions where the supernova remnant Sgr A East is interacting with the interstellar medium. The majority of the newly found 1720 MHz OH masers are located to the northeast, independently indicating and confirming an area of shock interaction with the +50 km/s molecular cloud (M-0.02-0.07) on the far side of Sgr A East. The previously known bright masers in the southeast are suggested to be the result of the interaction between two supernova remnants, instead of between Sgr A East and the surrounding molecular clouds as generally found elsewhere in the Galaxy. Together with masers north of the circumnuclear disk (CND) they outline an interaction on the near side of Sgr A East. In contrast to the interaction between the +50 km/s cloud and Sgr A East, OH absorption data do not support a direct interaction between the CND material and Sgr A East. We also present three new high-negative velocity masers, supporting a previous single detection. The location and velocities of the high-negative and high-positive velocity masers are consistent with being near the tangent points of, and physically located in the CND. We argue that the high velocity masers in the CND are pumped by dissipation between density clumps in the CND instead of a shock generated by the supernova remnant. That is, the CND masers are not coupled to the supernova remnant and are sustained independently.
We present multiepoch spectra of 13 high-redshift Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) drawn from the literature, the ESSENCE and SNLS projects, and our own separate dedicated program on the ESO Very Large Telescope. We use the Supernova Identification (SNID) code of Blondin & Tonry to determine the spectral ages in the supernova rest frame. Comparison with the observed elapsed time yields an apparent aging rate consistent with the 1/(1+z) factor (where z is the redshift) expected in a homogeneous, isotropic, expanding universe. These measurements thus confirm the expansion hypothesis, while unambiguously excluding models that predict no time dilation, such as Zwicky's "tired light" hypothesis. We also test for power-law dependencies of the aging rate on redshift. The best-fit exponent for these models is consistent with the expected 1/(1+z) factor.
High-resolution radio observations of nearby starburst galaxies have shown that the distribution of their radio emission consists of a compact (<150 pc), high surface brightness, central radio source immersed in a low surface brightness circumnuclear halo. This radio structure is similar to that detected in bright Seyferts galaxies like NGC 7469 or Mrk 331, which display clear circumnuclear rings. While the compact, centrally located radio emission in these starbursts might be generated by a point-like source (AGN), or by the combined effect of multiple radio supernovae and supernova remnants (e.g., the evolved nuclear starburst in Arp~220), it seems well established that the circumnuclear regions of those objects host an ongoing burst of star-formation (e.g., NGC 7469; Colina et al. 2001, Alberdi et al. 2006). Therefore, high-resolution radio observations of Luminous Infra-Red Galaxies (LIRGs) in our local universe are a powerful tool to probe the dominant dust heating mechanism in their nuclear and circumnuclear regions.   In this contribution, we show results obtained from VLA-A, MERLIN, and EVN (VLBI) radio observations of the galaxies NGC 7469 (D~70 Mpc) and IRAS 18293-3413 (D ~ 79 Mpc), where two extremely bright radio supernovae have been found. High-resolution studies of these and other LIRGs would allow us to determine the core-collapse supernova rate in them, as well as their star-formation rate.
Presenting population models of high-mass X-ray binaries (HMXBs) formed after bursts of star formation, we investigate the effect of electron-capture supernovae (ECS) of massive ONeMg white dwarfs and the hypothesis that ECS events are associated with typically low supernova kicks imparted to the nascent neutron stars. We identify an interesting ECS bump in the time evolution of HMXB numbers; this bump is caused by significantly increased production of wind-fed HMXBs 20-60 Myr post starburst. The amplitude and age extent of the ECS bump depend on the strength of ECS kicks and the mass range of ECS progenitors. We also find that ECS-HMXBs form through a specific evolutionary channel that is expected to lead to binaries with Be donors in wide orbits. These characteristics, along with their sensitivity to ECS properties, provide us with an intriguing opportunity to probe ECS physics and progenitors through studies of starbursts of different ages. Specifically, the case of the Small Magellanic Cloud, with a significant observed population of Be HMXBs and starburst activity 30-60 Myr ago, arises as a promising laboratory for understanding the role of electron-capture supernovae in neutron star formation.
A fundamental presupposition of modern cosmology is the Copernican Principle; that we are not in a central, or otherwise special region of the Universe. Studies of Type Ia supernovae, together with the Copernican Principle, have led to the inference that the Universe is accelerating in its expansion. The usual explanation for this is that there must exist a `Dark Energy', to drive the acceleration. Alternatively, it could be the case that the Copernican Principle is invalid, and that the data has been interpreted within an inappropriate theoretical frame-work. If we were to live in a special place in the Universe, near the centre of a void where the local matter density is low, then the supernovae observations could be accounted for without the addition of dark energy. We show that the local redshift dependence of the luminosity distance can be used as a clear discriminant between these two paradigms. Future surveys of Type Ia supernovae that focus on a redshift range of ~0.1-0.4 will be ideally suited to test this hypothesis, and hence to observationally determine the validity of the Copernican Principle on new scales, as well as probing the degree to which dark energy must be considered a necessary ingredient in the Universe.
The neutrino-nucleus reaction cross sections of 4He and 12C are evaluated using new shell model Hamiltonians. Branching ratios of various decay channels are calculated to evaluate the yields of Li, Be, and B produced through the nu-process in supernova explosions. The new cross sections enhance the yields of 7Li and 11B produced during the supernova explosion of a 16.2 M_odot star model compared to the case using the conventional cross sections by about 10%. On the other hand, the yield of 10B decreases by a factor of two. The yields of 6Li, 9Be, and the radioactive nucleus 10Be are found at a level of 10^{-11} M_odot. The temperature of nu_{mu,tau}- and bar{nu}_{mu,tau}-neutrinos inferred from the supernova contribution of 11B in Galactic chemical evolution models is constrained to the 4.3-6.5 MeV range. The increase in the 7Li and 11B yields due to neutrino oscillations is demonstrated with the new cross sections.
(Abridged) We explore numerically the chemical, thermal, and dynamical evolution of a shell formed by a high-energy supernova explosion ($10^{53}$ erg) in dwarf protogalaxies with total mass $10^7 M_\odot$ at a redshift $z=12$. We consider two initial configurations for the baryonic matter, one without rotation and the other having the ratio of rotational to gravitational energy $\beta=0.17$. The (non-rotating) dark matter halo is described by a quasi-isothermal sphere. We find that the dynamics of the shell is different in protogalaxies with and without rotation. For instance, the Rayleigh-Taylor instability in the shell develops faster in protogalaxies without rotation. The fraction of a blown-away baryonic mass is approximately twice as large in models with rotation ($\sim 20%$) than in models without rotation. On the other hand, the chemical evolution of gas in protogalaxies with and without rotation is found to be similar. The relative number densities of molecular hydrogen and HD molecules in the cold gas ($T \le 10^3$ K) saturate at typical values of $10^{-3}$ and $10^{-7}$, respectively. The clumps formed in the fragmented shell move with velocities that are at least twice as large as the escape velocity. The mass of the clumps is $\sim 0.1-10 \msun$, which is lower than the Jeans mass. We conclude that the clumps are pressure supported. A supernova explosion with energy $10^{53}$ ergs destructs our model protogalaxy. The clumps formed in the fragmented shell are pressure supported. We conclude that protogalaxies with total mass $\sim 10^{7} M_\odot$ are unlikely to form stars due to high-energy supernova explosions of the first stars.
The Hubble relation between distance and redshift is a purely cosmographic relation that depends only on the symmetries of a FLRW spacetime, but does not intrinsically make any dynamical assumptions. This suggests that it should be possible to estimate the parameters defining the Hubble relation without making any dynamical assumptions. To test this idea, we perform a number of inter-related cosmographic fits to the legacy05 and gold06 supernova datasets. Based on this supernova data, the "preponderance of evidence" certainly suggests an accelerating universe. However we would argue that (unless one uses additional dynamical and observational information) this conclusion is not currently supported "beyond reasonable doubt". As part of the analysis we develop two particularly transparent graphical representations of the redshift-distance relation -- representations in which acceleration versus deceleration reduces to the question of whether the relevant graph slopes up or down. Turning to the details of the cosmographic fits, three issues in particular concern us: First, the fitted value for the deceleration parameter changes significantly depending on whether one performs a chi^2 fit to the luminosity distance, proper motion distance or other suitable distance surrogate. Second, the fitted value for the deceleration parameter changes significantly depending on whether one uses the traditional redshift variable z, or what we shall argue is on theoretical grounds an improved parameterization y=z/(1+z). Third, the published estimates for systematic uncertainties are sufficiently large that they certainly impact on, and to a large extent undermine, the usual purely statistical tests of significance. We conclude that the supernova data should be treated with some caution.
We present mid-infrared spectral mapping observations of the core-collapse supernova remnant 1E 0102.2-7219 in the Small Magellanic Cloud using the InfraRed Spectrograph (IRS) on the Spitzer Space Telescope. The remnant shows emission from fine structure transitions of neon and oxygen as well as continuum emission from dust. Comparison of the mid-IR dust emission with observations at x-ray, radio and optical wavelengths shows that the dust is associated with the supernova ejecta and is thus newly formed in the remnant. The spectrum of the newly formed dust is well reproduced by a model that includes 3x10^-3 solar masses of amorphous carbon dust at 70 K and 2x10^-5 solar masses of Mg2SiO4 (forsterite) at 145 K. Our observations place a lower limit on the amount of dust in the remnant since we are not sensitive to the cold dust in the unshocked ejecta. We compare our results to observations of other core-collapse supernovae and remnants, particularly Cas A where very similar spectral mapping observations have been carried out. We observe a a factor of ~10 less dust in E 0102 than seen in Cas A, although the amounts of amorphous carbon and forsterite are comparable.
Magnification and de-magnification due to gravitational lensing will contribute to the brightness scatter of Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia). The purpose of this paper is to investigate the possibility to decrease this scatter by correcting individual SNe Ia using observations of galaxies in the foreground, without introducing any extra bias. We simulate a large number of SN Ia lines of sight populated by galaxies. For each line of sight the true magnification factor and an estimate thereof are calculated. The estimated magnification factor corresponds to what an observer would infer from a survey like SNLS. Using the simulated data we investigate the possibility to estimate the magnification of individual supernovae with enough precision to be able to correct their brightness for gravitational lensing with negligible bias. Our simulations show that the bias arising from gravitational lensing corrections of individual SNe Ia is negligible for current and next generation surveys and that the scatter from lensing can be reduced by approximately a factor 2. The total scatter in the SN Ia magnitudes could be reduced by 4% for an intrinsic dispersion of 0.13 mag. For an intrinsic dispersion of 0.09 mag, which might not be to unrealistic for future surveys, the total scatter could be reduced by 6%. This will reduce the errors on cosmological parameters derived from supernova data by 4-8%. The prospect of correcting for lensing is thus very good.
Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) are thermonuclear explosions of white dwarf stars in close binary systems. They play an important role as cosmological distance indicators and have led to the discovery of the accelerated expansion of the Universe. Among the most important unsolved questions are how the explosion actually proceeds and whether accretion occurs from a companion or via the merging of two white dwarfs. Tycho Brahe's supernova of 1572 (SN 1572) is thought to be one of the best candidates for a SN Ia in the Milky Way. The proximity of the SN 1572 remnant has allowed detailed studies, such as the possible identification of the binary companion, and provides a unique opportunity to test theories of the explosion mechanism and the nature of the progenitor. The determination of the yet unknown exact spectroscopic type of SN 1572 is crucial to relate these results to the diverse population of SNe Ia. Here we report an optical spectrum of Tycho Brahe's supernova near maximum brightness, obtained from a scattered-light echo more than four centuries after the direct light of the explosion swept past Earth. We find that SN 1572 belongs to the majority class of normal SNe Ia. The presence of a strong Ca II IR feature at velocities exceeding 20,000 km/s, which is similar to the previously observed polarized features in other SNe Ia, suggests asphericity in SN 1572.
Hyper-velocity stars (HVSs) were first predicted by theory to be the result of the tidal disruption of a binary system by a super-massive black hole (SMBH) that accelerates one component to beyond the Galactic escape velocity (the Hills mechanism). Because the Galactic centre hosts such a SMBH it is the suggested place of origin for HVSs. However, the SMBH paradigm has been challenged recently by the young HVS HD271791 because its kinematics point to a birthplace in the metal-poor rim of the Galactic disc. Here we report the atmosphere of HD271791 to indeed show a sub-solar iron abundance along with an enhancement of the alpha-elements, indicating capture of nucleosynthesis products from a supernova or a more energetic hypernova. This implies that HD271791 is the surviving secondary of a massive binary system disrupted in a supernova explosion. No such run-away star has ever been found to exceed the Galactic escape velocity, hence HD271791 is the first hyper-runaway star. Such a run-away scenario is an alternative to the Hills mechanism for the acceleration of some HVSs with moderate velocities. The observed chemical composition of HD271791 puts invaluable observational constraints on nucleosynthesis in a supernova from the core-collapse of a very massive star (M_ZAMS >= 55 M_Sun), which may be observed as a gamma-ray burst of the long-duration/soft-spectrum type.
Context: Multiwavelength observations of supernova remnants can be explained within the framework of the diffusive shock acceleration theory, which allows effective conversion of the explosion energy into cosmic rays. Although the models of nonlinear shocks describe reasonably well the nonthermal component of emission, certain issues, including the heating of the thermal plasma and the related X-ray emission, remain still open.   Aims: To discuss how the evolution and structure of supernova remnants is affected by strong particle acceleration at the forward shock.   Methods: Analytical estimates combined with detailed discussion of the physical processes.   Results: The overall dynamics is shown to be relatively insensitive to the amount of particle acceleration, but the post-shock gas temperature can be reduced to a relatively small multiple, even as small as six times, the ambient temperature with a very weak dependence on the shock speed. This is in marked contrast to pure gas models where the temperature is insensitive to the ambient temperature and is determined by the square of the shock speed. It thus appears to be possible to suppress effectively thermal X-ray emission from remnants by strong particle acceleration. This might provide a clue for understanding the lack of thermal X-rays from the TeV bright supernova remnant RX J1713.7-3946.
The Diffuse Supernova Neutrino Background (DSNB) provides an immediate opportunity to study the emission of MeV thermal neutrinos from core-collapse supernovae. The DSNB is a powerful probe of stellar and neutrino physics, provided that the core-collapse rate is large enough and that its uncertainty is small enough. To assess the important physics enabled by the DSNB, we start with the cosmic star formation history of Hopkins & Beacom (2006) and confirm its normalization and evolution by cross-checks with the supernova rate, extragalactic background light, and stellar mass density. We find a sufficient core-collapse rate with small uncertainties that translate into a variation of +/- 40% in the DSNB event spectrum. Considering thermal neutrino spectra with effective temperatures between 4-6 MeV, the predicted DSNB is within a factor 4-2 below the upper limit obtained by Super-Kamiokande in 2003. Furthermore, detection prospects would be dramatically improved with a gadolinium-enhanced Super-Kamiokande: the backgrounds would be significantly reduced, the fluxes and uncertainties converge at the lower threshold energy, and the predicted event rate is 1.2-5.6 events /yr in the energy range 10-26 MeV. These results demonstrate the imminent detection of the DSNB by Super-Kamiokande and its exciting prospects for studying stellar and neutrino physics.
Theoretically expected natures of a supernova driven by a wind/jet are discussed. Approximate analytical formulations are derived to clarify basic physical processes involved in the wind/jet-driven explosions, and it is shown that the explosion properties are characterized by the energy injection rate (Edot_iso) and the mass injection rate (Mdot_iso). To explain observations of SN 1998bw associated with Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB) 980425, the following conditions are required: Edot_iso Mdot_iso > ~ 10^{51} erg M_sun s^{-2} and Edot_iso > ~ 2 x 10^{52} erg s^{-1} (if the wind Lorentz factor Gamma_w ~ 1) or Edot_iso > ~ 7 x 10^{52} erg s^{-1} (if Gamma_w >> 1). In SN 1998bw, 56Ni (~ 0.4M_sun) is probably produced in the shocked stellar mantle, not in the wind. The expected natures of SNe, e.g., ejected 56Ni masses and ejecta masses, vary depending on Edot_iso and Mdot_iso. The sequence of the SN properties from high Edot_iso and Mdot_iso to low Edot_iso and Mdot_iso is the following: SN 1998bw-like -- intermediate case -- low mass ejecta (< ~ 1M_sun$) where 56Ni is from the wind -- whole collapse. This diversity may explain the diversity of supernovae associated with GRBs. Our result can be used to constrain natures of the wind/jet, which is linked to the central engine of GRBs, by studying properties of the associated supernovae.
Supernova remnants have long been regarded as sources of the Galactic cosmic rays up to petaelectronvolts, but convincing evidence is still lacking. In this work we explore the common origin of the subtle features of the cosmic ray spectra, such as the knee of cosmic ray spectra and the excesses of electron/positron fluxes recently observed by ATIC, H.E.S.S., Fermi-LAT and PAMELA. Numerical calculation shows that those features of cosmic ray spectra can be well reproduced in a scenario with e$^+$e$^-$ pair production by interactions between high energy cosmic rays and background photons in an environment similar to the young supernova remnant. The success of such a coherent explanation serves in turn as an evidence that at least a portion of cosmic rays might be accelerated at young supernova remnants.
Observational evidences point to a common explosion mechanism of Type Ia supernovae based on a delayed detonation of a white dwarf. However, all attempts to find a convincing ignition mechanism based on a delayed detonation in a destabilized, expanding, white dwarf have been elusive so far. One of the possibilities that has been invoked is that an inefficient deflagration leads to pulsation of a Chandrasekhar-mass white dwarf, followed by formation of an accretion shock that confines a carbon-oxygen rich core, while transforming the kinetic energy of the collapsing halo into thermal energy of the core, until an inward moving detonation is formed. This chain of events has been termed Pulsating Reverse Detonation (PRD). In this work we present three dimensional numerical simulations of PRD models from the time of detonation initiation up to homologous expansion. Different models characterized by the amount of mass burned during the deflagration phase, M_defl, give explosions spanning a range of kinetic energies, K ~ (1.0-1.2) foes, and 56Ni masses, M(56Ni) ~ 0.6-0.8 M_sun, which are compatible with what is expected for typical Type Ia supernovae. Spectra and light curves of angle-averaged spherically symmetric versions of the PRD models are discussed. Type Ia supernova spectra pose the most stringent requirements on PRD models.
We analyze the statistical properties of the turbulent velocity field in the deflagration model for Type Ia supernovae. In particular, we consider the question of whether turbulence is isotropic and consistent with the Kolmogorov theory at small length scales. Using numerical data from a high-resolution simulation of a thermonuclear supernova explosion, spectra of the turbulence energy and velocity structure functions are computed. We show that the turbulent velocity field is isotropic at small length scales and follows a scaling law that is consistent with the Kolmogorov theory until most of the nuclear fuel is burned. At length scales greater than a certain characteristic scale, turbulence becomes anisotropic. Here, the radial velocity fluctuations follow the scaling law of the Rayleigh-Taylor instability, whereas the angular component still obeys Kolmogorov scaling. In the late phase of the explosion, this characteristic scale drops below the numerical resolution of the simulation. The analysis confirms that a subgrid-scale model for the unresolved turbulence energy is required for the consistent calculation of the flame speed in deflagration models of Type Ia supernovae, and that the assumption of isotropy on these scales is appropriate.
Using data drawn from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and the SDSS-II Supernova Survey, we study the local environments of confirmed type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia) in the nearby Universe. At 0.05 < z < 0.15, we find that SN Ia events in blue, star-forming galaxies occur preferentially in regions of lower galaxy density relative to galaxies of like stellar mass and star-formation rate, while SNe Ia in nearby red galaxies show no significant environment dependence within the measurement uncertainties. Even though our samples of SNe in red hosts are relatively small in number, tests on simulated galaxy samples suggest that the observed distribution of environments for red SN Ia hosts is in poor agreement with a cluster type Ia rate strongly elevated relative to the field rate. Finally, after considering the impact of galaxy morphology, stellar age, stellar metallicity, and other relevant galaxy properties, we conclude that the observed correlation between the SN Ia rate and environment in the star-forming galaxy population is likely driven by a gas-phase metallicity effect, such that prompt type Ia supernovae occur more often or are more luminous in metal-poor systems.
The "Scenario Machine" (a computer code designed for studies of the evolution of close binaries) was used to carry out a population synthesis for a wide range of merging astrophysical objects: main-sequence stars with main-sequence stars; white dwarfs with white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes; neutron stars with neutron stars and black holes; and black holes with black holes.We calculate the rates of such events, and plot the mass distributions for merging white dwarfs and main-sequence stars. It is shown that Type Ia supernovae can be used as standard candles only after approximately one billion years of evolution of galaxies. In the course of this evolution, the average energy of Type Ia supernovae should decrease by roughly 10%; the maximum and minimum energies of Type Ia supernovae may differ by no less than by a factor of 1.5. This circumstance should be taken into account in estimations of parameters of acceleration of the Universe. According to theoretical estimates, the most massive - as a rule, magnetic - white dwarfs probably originate from mergers of white dwarfs of lower mass. At least some magnetic Ap and Bp stars may form in mergers of low-mass main sequence stars (<1.5 mass of the Sun) with convective envelopes.
After a decade of Fireball reign there is a hope for thin collimated Jet to solve the Supernova-GRB mystery
Prior to explosion, a supernova progenitor slowly loses significant amounts of its hydrogen envelope in a stellar wind. After the explosion, the blastwave interacts with this wind producing synchrotron emission. A year of radio observations allows us to probe the progenitor evolution for a thousand years. The EVLA and SKA would represent more than an order of magnitude improvement in our ability to explore the pre-explosion lives of a significantly large population of supernova progenitor stars. It will allow us to move beyond the crude optical classifications and develop a deeper physical understanding of how massive stars live and die.
A pulsar wind nebula inside a supernova remnant provides a unique insight into the properties of the central neutron star, the relativistic wind powered by its loss of rotational energy, its progenitor supernova, and the surrounding environment. In this paper, we present a new semi-analytic model for the evolution of such a pulsar wind nebula which couples the dynamical and radiative evolution of the pulsar wind nebulae, traces the evolution of the pulsar wind nebulae throughout the lifetime of the supernova remnant produced by the progenitor explosion, and predicts both the dynamical and radiative properties of the pulsar wind nebula during this period. We also discuss the expected evolution for a particular set of these parameters, and show it reproduces many puzzling features of known young and old pulsar wind nebulae. The model also predicts spectral features during different phases of its evolution detectable with new radio and gamma-ray observing facilities. Finally, this model has implications for determining if pulsar wind nebulae can explain the recent measurements of the cosmic ray positron fraction by PAMELA and the cosmic ray lepton spectrum by ATIC and HESS.
X-ray observations reveiled a group of radio-silent isolated neutron stars (INSs) at the centre of young supernova remnants (SNRs), dubbed central compact objects or CCOs, with properties different from those of classical rotation-powered pulsars. In at least three cases, evidence points towards CCOs being low-magnetized INSs, born with slow rotation periods, and possibly accreting from a debris disc of material formed out of the supernova event. Understanding the origin of the diversity of the CCOs can shed light on supernova explosion and neutron star formation models. Optical/infrared (IR) observations are crucial to test different CCO interpretations. The aim of our work is to perform a deep optical investigation of the CCO RX J0822.0-4300 in the Puppis A SNR, one of the most poorly understood in the CCO family. By using as a reference the Chandra X-ray coordinates of RX J0822.0-4300, we performed deep optical observations in the B, V and I bands with the Very Large Telescope (VLT). We found no candidate optical counterpart within 3 sigma of the computed Chandra X-ray position down to 5 sigma limits of B~27.2, V~26.9, and I~25.6, the deepest obtained in the optical band for this source. These limits confirm the non-detection of a companion brighter than an M5 dwarf. At the same time, they do not constrain optical emission from the neutron star surface, while emission from the magnetosphere would require a spectral break in the optical/IR.
The field just West of the galactic supernova remnant W28   (l=6.4\degr, b=-0.2\degr) harbors 3 of 5 newly-discovered 1720 OH maser spots and two recently-discovered candidate supernova candidates (one of which is a $\gamma$-ray source), as well as several compact and classical HII regions. Here, we analyze a datacube of CO J=1-0 emission having 1\arcmin and 1 \kms resolution, made with on-the-fly mapping over the region $5\degr \le l \le 6\degr, -1\degr \le b \le 0.5\degr$}. {Extended and often very bright CO emission was detected at the velocities of the 1720 MHz OH masers and around the supernova remnant G5.55+0.32 which lacks a maser. A new bipolar outflow which is marginally resolved at 1\arcmin resolution and strong in CO (12K) was detected at the periphery of G5.55+0.32, coincident with an MSX source; there is also a bright rim of CO just beyond the periphery of the radio remnant. The OH maser near G5.71-0.08 lies on a shell of strongly-emitting molecular gas (up to 20K) . At the -21 \kms velocity of G5.4-1.2, CO covers much of the field but is weak (3 K) and undisturbed near the remnant. The extended molecular gas around the compact H II region and outflow in G5.89-0.39 (W28A2) is shown for the first time.}
We have undertaken a systematic search for candidate supernovae from high-redshift Population III stars in a field that has been observed with repeated imaging on a cadence of 2-3 weeks over a 2.2 year baseline, the Spitzer/IRAC Dark Field. The individual epochs reach a typical 5-sigma depth of 1 uJy in IRAC Channel 1 (3.6 um). Requiring a minimum of four epochs coverage, the total effective area searched is 214 sq arcminutes. The unprecedented depth and multi-epochal nature of these data make it ideal for a first foray to detect transient objects which may be candidate luminous Pair Instability Supernovae from the primordial-metallicity first stars. The search was conducted over a broad range of timescales, allowing for different durations of the putative candidates' light curve plateau phases. All candidates were vetted by inspection of the Spitzer imaging data, as well as deep HST/ACS F814W imaging available over the full field. While many resolved-source objects were found with Spitzer variability, no transient objects could plausibly be identified as high-redshift supernovae candidates. The resulting 95% confidence level upper limit is 23/sq deg/yr, for sources with plateau timescales under 400/(1+z) days and brightnesses above ~1 uJy.
We present the analysis of three Suzaku observations of a bright arc in the ROSAT All-Sky Survey 1/4 keV maps at $l \approx 247\degr$, $b \approx -64\degr$. In particular, we have tested the hypothesis that the arc is the edge of a bubble blown by an extraplanar supernova. One pointing direction is near the brightest part of the arc, one is toward the interior of the hypothesized bubble, and one is toward the bubble exterior. We fit spectral models generated from 1-D hydrodynamical simulations of extraplanar supernova remnants (SNRs) to the spectra. The spectra and the size of the arc ($\mathrm{radius} \approx 5\degr$) are reasonably well explained by a model in which the arc is the bright edge of a $\sim$100,000-yr old SNR located $\sim$1--2 kpc above the disk. The agreement between the model and the observations can be improved if the metallicity of the X-ray--emitting gas is $\sim$1/3 solar, which is plausible, as the dust which sequesters some metals is unlikely to have been destroyed in the lifetime of the SNR. The width of the arc is larger than that predicted by our SNR model; this discrepancy is also seen with the Vela SNR, and may be due to the 1-D nature of our simulations. If the arc is indeed the edge of an extraplanar SNR, this work supports the idea that extraplanar supernovae contribute to the heating of the $\sim$million-degree gas in the halo.
We use the new SNe Ia discovered by the SDSS-II Supernova Survey together with additional supernova datasets as well as observations of the cosmic microwave background and baryon acoustic oscillations to constrain cosmological models. This complements the analysis presented by Kessler et al. in that we discuss and rank a number of the most popular non-standard cosmology scenarios. When this combined data-set is analyzed using the MLCS2k2 light-curve fitter, we find that more exotic models for cosmic acceleration provide a better fit to the data than the Lambda-CDM model. For example, the flat DGP model is ranked higher by our information criteria tests than the standard model. When the dataset is instead analyzed using the SALT-II light-curve fitter, the standard cosmological constant model fares best. Our investigation also includes inhomogeneous Lemaitre-Tolman-Bondi (LTB) models. While our LTB models can be made to fit the supernova data as well as any other model, the extra parameters they require are not supported by our information criteria analysis.
We consider simple models based on core collapse or pair-formation supernovae to account for the light curve of the transient SCP06F6. A radioactive decay diffusion model provides estimates of the mass of the required radioactive nickel and the ejecta as functions of the unknown redshift. An opacity change such as by dust formation or a recombination front may account for the rapid decline from maximum. We particularly investigate two specific redshifts: $z=0.143$, for which Gaensicke et al. (2008) have proposed that the unidentified broad absorption features in the spectrum of SCP06F6 are C$_{2}$ Swan bands, and $z=0.57$ based on a crude agreement with the Ca H&K and UV iron-peak absorption features that are characteristic of supernovae of various types. The ejected masses and kinetic energies are smaller for a more tightly constrained model invoking envelope recombination. We also discuss the possibilities of circumstellar matter (CSM) shell diffusion and shock interaction models. In general, optically-thick CSM diffusion models can fit the data with the underlying energy coming from an energetic buried supernova. Models in which the CSM is of lower density so that the shock energy is both rapidly thermalized and radiated tend not to be self-consistent. We suggest that a model of SCP06F6 worth futher exploration is one in which the redshift is $\sim$ 0.57, the spectral features are Ca and iron peak elements, and the light curve is powered by the diffusive release of a substantial amount of energy from nickel decay or from an energetic supernova buried in the ejecta of an LBV-like event.
We discuss the extent to which photometric measurements alone can be used to identify Type Ia supernovae (SNIa) and to determine redshift and other parameters of interest for cosmological studies. We fit the light curve data of the type expected from a survey such as the one planned with Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) and also to remove the contamination from the core-collapse supernovae to SNIa samples. We generate 1000 SNIa mock flux data for each of the LSST filters based on existing design parameters, then use a Markov Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) analysis to fit for the redshift, apparent magnitude, stretch factor and the phase of the SNIa. We find that the model fitting works adequately well when the true SNe redshift is below 0.5, while at $z < 0.2$ the accuracy of the photometric data is almost comparable with spectroscopic measurements of the same sample. We discuss the contamination of Type Ib/c (SNIb/c) and Type II supernova (SNII) on the SNIa data set. We find it is easy to distinguish the SNII through the large $\chi^2$ mismatch when fitting to photometric data with Ia light curves. This is not the case for SNIb/c. We implement a statistical method based on the Bayesian estimation in order to statistically reduce the contamination from SNIb/c for cosmological parameter measurements from the whole SNe sample. The proposed statistical method also evaluate the fraction of the SNIa in the total SNe data set, which provides a valuable guide to establish the degree of contamination.
In the leptonic scenario for TeV emission from a few well-observed shell-type TeV supernova remnants (STTSNRs), very weak magnetic fields are inferred. If fast-mode waves are produced efficiently in the shock downstream, we show that they are viable agents for acceleration of relativistic electrons inferred from the observed spectra even in the subsonic phase, in spite that these waves are subject to strong damping by thermal background ions at small dissipation scales. Strong collisionless non-relativistic astrophysical shocks are studied with the assumption of a constant Aflven speed in the downstream. The turbulence evolution is modeled with both the Kolmogorov and Kraichnan phenomenology. Processes determining the high-energy cutoff of nonthermal electron distributions are examined. The Kraichnan models lead to a shallower high-energy cutoff of the electron distribution and require a lower downstream density than the Kolmogorov models to fit a given emission spectrum. With reasonable parameters, the model explains observations of STTSNRs, including recent data obtained with the Fermi gamma-ray telescope. More detailed studies of the turbulence generation and dissipation processes, supernova explosions and progenitors are warranted for better understanding the nature of supernova shocks.
